#========
Canto01


1. May the fire of Shiva’s (third) eye, standing for a lamp that burnt to ashes the locust in the form of Kama, reign supreme. In its vicinity, the rays of the moon on Shiva’s crest appear lovely like an arrangement of white wicks.[1]  
2. May the fire of Shiva’s (third) eye grant you prosperity/sacred ash and burn down your sins – a fire that, in spite of being smokeless, stage-managed Rati’s incessant shedding of tears.[2]
3. May the Fire, dancing a robust dance on the stage that is Shiva’s forehead, save us. Kama, Rati’s sweetheart, offered his very body to it (i.e., the Fire-dancer) as a gift, so it seemed.[3]
4.  Let Shiva’s eye – one that has forged a friendship with fire – proclaim happiness to you. In the pleasure bed of fresh leaves formed by its (i.e., the eye’s) billowing flames, Kama fell into a deep sleep, even without Rati by his side.[4] 
5. May the fire that passes through the centre of Shiva’s rampart-like forehead and divides it into two halves destroy your sins. The moon on the Lord’s crest, melting constantly as it were by coming into contact with its heat, never attains fullness.
6. Let the fire of Shiva’s arrow reduce your sin to ashes. Like a second Aurva fire, it never had enough of the flood of tears shed by long-eyed Danava damsels.[5]
7. May Shiva, the universal teacher, save us. The Celestial River, by way of her row of revolving eddies, seems to circumambulate around him even though he (himself) bears her (respectfully) upon his head.[6]
8. May Shiva’s boisterous laughs – bright as ambrosia – dispel the pale of gloom from the world. Thanks to them, even the directions, smeared as it were with holy ash, embrace the Shaiva vow.[7]
9. Salutations to the moon on Shiva’s crest – in whose vicinity roar Ganga’s waves – as if the moon, because of his closeness to the Lord, was exhibiting the loud laughter that he learnt from the latter.[8]
10.  Let Shiva’s form – thickly smeared in ash and therefore covered as it were with pieces of white slough discarded by serpents clinging to his each and every limb – eliminate your unrelenting sins.[9] 
11.  By drenching the heads of his prostrating devotees with streams of water oozing from moonstones in his crown – moonstones that melt under the influence of the moon on his crest – he seems to create an illusion of the Ganga trickling down from them (i.e., the heads) so as to bring about a state of semblance (between himself and his devotees). May he protect you.[10]
12.  Victorious is the blue-throated Shiva/peacock’s ally, a bountiful cloud raining down gold on king Marutta/a windy place and sprouting rainbows by way of the rays emanating from the crest jewels of its several ornamental serpents.[11]  
13.  All praise to the fire in Shiva’s eye. For the sake of that fire - a needy supplicant – the Bodhisattva called Kama sacrificed his body, thereby displaying, as never before, a generosity that is beyond measure.[12]
14.  On his crest, a row of Ganga’s foamy masses appears like a line of swans – vehicles of Brahma – come there to wait upon their master’s esteemed skull. May he (i.e., Shiva) protect you.[13]
15.  Desirous to acquire as it were the ability to endure the heat of the submarine fire when she enters the ocean, Ganga acquaints herself with the flames of his ocular fire. May he (i.e., Shiva) offer you protection.[14]
16.  May Shiva offer you protection. Under the pretext of the sounds emanating from his skulls – pervaded by the breeze of Ganga’s waves – the Moon (that is in the vicinity of the skulls) recites the Vedas as it were so his lordship over Brahmins is rendered meaningful.[15]
17.  In the apocalyptic night of the knitted eyebrow, emitting the impenetrable darkness of anger, Death slept a wakeless sleep on the fiery bed of his third eye. May he (i.e., Shiva) offer you succour.[16]  
18.  Let the moon of Devi’s face – that gathers its moonlight by way of the radiance emanating from her teeth - protect you. The fawn never hops on to this moon, as if fearful from afar of the lion that is her mount.[17] 
19.  May Chandika’s foot - lifted up in the Dandapada movement - protect you by pulverizing the club of painful worldly existence. The crescent moon, gleaming before that foot, resembles an anklet breaking off from it.[18] 
20.  Let Chandi’s skull bowl – creating the illusion of a two-mooned sky – bring (us) fame. Within it, the radiant light issuing forth from the gems that adorn the hoods of serpents residing in her matted locks takes on the appearance of red wine.[19] 
21.  May Brahma’s abode remove your suffering. This sovereign emperor among lotuses alone enjoys being fanned by the white whisks, namely, the brisk and lively swans that are the god’s vehicles.[20] 
22.  May the lotus of the lotus-born Brahma purify you. Rendering service unto him by softly massaging all his limbs, it receives (from him) its share of wages: a state of being employed as the (standard) simile of the eminently pretty faces of ladies.[21]
23.  Let the white-coloured holy pot that adorns the Creator’s lotus-hand confer protection to you. It appears like the moon that, having given up its enmity with the lotus on which the Creator sits, has become his close companion.[22] 
24.  May the Primeval Poet (i.e., Brahma) – who revels in the act of creation that is solely characterized by diversity/whose epic, though solely characterized by constrained poetry, is replete with several sentiments – be endowed with universal compassion/clarity of thought.[23]
25.  Having perfectly comprehended each and every detail (of creation) by entering as it were into the belly of Vishnu, he creates the whole universe with ease. May he, the Lotus-born (i.e., Brahma), protect you.[24] 
26.  Vishnu’s form reigns supreme. It exudes beads of sweat when he embraces Shri with his arms – beads that are droplets of water as it were oozing from the rivers occupying its every joint, thanks to the simultaneous squeezing (by Lakshmi’s breasts).[25] 
27.  May Vishnu – death personified to the Daitya hordes – destroy your sins. Since the left half of his body is formed by his beloved wife, it appears as if he is still playfully holding on to a remnant of the Mohini form.[26]
28.  Worthy of praise is Hari whose dark body, having concealed the mace, put on the handsome disguise of a dwarf and who therefore seems to grant his enemies – always contemplating on him – divine similitude for they too possess a body that is discoloured dark due to disease and lacking in handsomeness.
29.  May Lord Vishnu – marked by the Kaustubha gem – grant you prosperity. He – a garland of blue lilies borne by the Serpent Lord on his crest – seems to have turned dark by stealing away thick kohl from the eyes of women wedded to Daitya chieftains.[27] 
30.  On Shesha’s coiled-up (white) body – a thick pearl necklace adorning the universe’s Lady Fortune – he appears like the central sapphire. May he, the Lord that cuts short Diti’s lineage, bring success closer to you.[28] 
31.  May Vishnu – blower of the Panchajanya conch – drench you with thousands of ambrosial drops. He is possessed of rays of light emanating from his Kaustubha jewel that appear like a mass of lightning streaks fallen from the clouds that populate his tresses.[29]
32.  She sits atop a bloomed lotus in order to assume as it were the office of Brahma, the primordial creator, so she can materialize a unique creation that is characterized by opulence. May she, goddess Shri, rain wealth upon you.[30]
33.  All praise to Lakshmi. With limbs concealed sometimes by bees that are close associates of her lotus-abode, she seems to have turned her body black in order to resemble her husband who is as dark as the nala reed in form.[31]
34.  May Sarasvati, worthy of salutation by the entire host of celestials, grant you your wish. Riding on the wings of water birds par excellence (i. e., swans)/aligning herself with the intentions of great poets, she shines forth by her unhindered progress.[32] 
35.  May goddess Sarasvati – danseuse dancing on the tips of the tongues of preeminent poets – bless us with the attainment of skilfulness. The flock of swans that are her vehicles waits upon her perpetually, attracted as if by the sound of her anklets.[33] 
36.  She seems to wipe away the ignorant person’s dust of ignorance with the wings of the briskly swirling swans that are her vehicles. May Sarasvati, the goddess presiding over speech, dry up the sins that flood your minds.[34]
37.  May the Goddess of speech reveal to you the juicy essence of poetry – one that puts a lid on honey’s glory. This essence is ambrosial drops in a different avatar; it is also the very undoing of the boastful pride that (sweet) wood- apples and the like possess.[35]
38.  May the elephant-faced Ganesha – who nullifies obstacles even before they can arise – bless you with a prosperous state. He possesses a face that, like a grand festival taken concrete form, is adorned with vermilion and exudes ichor/abounds in the use of vermilion and the giving of gifts.[36]
39.  Disguised as a (single) tusk that is smeared with the vermilion of his temples, he seems to the carry the moon’s scarlet-red evening crescent for vanquishing the virtuous devotee’s darkness of delusion. May he, the Elephant-faced Lord, confer happiness on you.  
40.  Through the swarm of bees hankering after the flow of ichor, his enormous frontal globe appears to be equipped with an iron chain for enshackling obstacles. May he, Ganesha, bring you happiness.[37]
41.  He made the Daitya women rain down tears as if to delight the peacock that is his mount. May Skanda – Parashurama’s prime wrestler – augment the happiness of people.[38]
42.  Though his childness/state of being ‘Kumara’ is renowned in the universe, he is old in age/seated on a bird. May Vishakha (Skanda) - the branchless heavenly tree yielding everything that is wished for – grant us a life that branches out into one hundred years.[39]
43.  May Shiva’s chief combatant, Kama - chamberlain guarding the creation (akin to a harem) of the Lord who dwells in the lotus’s palace (i.e., Brahma) – perpetually protect the universe.[40]  
44.  The blessed discourse on devotion to Shiva reigns supreme for it is a path to liberation that is not bound by knowledge, a veritable sacrifice that does not require soliciting wealth, and a rain of ambrosia to the (poisonous) snakes, namely, the disbelievers.[41]
45.  Vishnu’s dark form is a strange night. It fosters the union of cakravaka couples/bears association with the Sudarshana discus; knew no contraction even when summer displaced spring/frailty even when the demon Madhu was seething with rage; makes the moon – king of the twice-born Brahmins - go down/sits atop Garuda – king of the twice-born birds; is seen to cause the withering of white lilies/has never been seen by anybody to cause gloom in the triple world; and awakens the universe from sleep/awakens us to knowledge. May this strange night that is Vishnu’s form make lotuses bloom for you/Lakshmi, the goddess of fortune, happily disposed towards you.[42]
46.  May Chandi’s upraised foot – reaching beyond the vault of the universe during her energetic dancing – endow the virtuous with an excess of joy. Attracted by the jingle of its anklet, the swans that pull Brahma’s chariot shake him up from his meditation all of a sudden.
47.  Salutations to the face – overflowing with pure bliss – of Parvati, seated on a majestic lion, possessed of swaying claws and a ferocious roar. The moon would perchance have rendered constant service to her in order to obtain a few drops of its (i.e., the face’s) loveliness only if he had not been handicapped because of the deer resting on his lap.[43]
48.  May that form of Shiva and Parvati where the two readily become one bring us auspiciousness. In it, Shiva is afraid of rendering praise to Lady Twilight, Parvati is too scared to have a confidential and private conversation with her friends, and the wicked, who are adept at breaking hearts, cannot persist with their backbiting talk.[44]
49.  Salutations to the light emanating from the eye that is situated on the broad forehead of Lord Shiva – Chandi’s consort – as he revels in exhibiting a variety of robust dance moves. God forbid, the ocean would have dried up by now due to its spreading heat if it had not been regularly exposed to the fieriness of Aurva – the aquatic inferno – blazing within.[45]
50.  I take refuge in Shiva, who, having ascended the chariot of space – furnished with a pair of wheels in the form of the sun and the moon – dances with such energy the multitude of mountains, battered thoroughly by a casual touch of his arms, regarded the blow of Indra’s thunderbolt as soothing.[46] 
51.  May the vast ground of Shiva’s handsome chest – beautified by the abundant waters of the Celestial River cascading majestically from the matted locks above – bless you with immense cheerfulness. Therein, the mountain-born Parvati, like a doe sporting in gay abandon, lovingly rests her limbs and exhibits every graceful movement to the utmost perfection.
52.  All praise to the row of Shiva’s toenails – adorned with red lac through the radiant glow of the rubies in the crowns of the prostrating gods. It appears like a portion of the (white) stalk adhering to the Lord’s lotus-feet. That its spreading light could not make the half-moon on Shiva’s crest full is a trick of his chest – encompassing the directions by its vastness.[47] 
53.  May the row of Shiva’s toenails purify you. Their foreheads kissed by its glow, his devotees seem to exhibit beforehand the lines of ash spewed by the yet-to-appear fire of the third eye.
54.  May Shiva’s bull – dusted white with ash as it were - grant you prosperity. Masquerading as that bull, the Crystal Mountain seems to have taken a second, movable, form impelled by this desire – “Let me be touched by the Master’s lotus-feet everywhere”. Or, perhaps, he is the Milky Ocean come to see his son (i.e., the Moon), bound in the Lord’s matted locks. 
55.  “He abounds in flowers. So, let us take refuge in all his limbs and enjoy the pinnacle of indescribable bliss” – Thinking thus, swarms of bees mob him in greed, wherefore his body appears dark-hued. May he, the spring god Vasanta, perpetually bring happiness to your hearts.  
56.  Many are the poets who have belittled their priceless words by putting them out for a cheap sale in the vicinity of the shops, namely, the court of kings. Mankha, on the contrary, is no less than a bard of Shiva, who presides over the assembly hall at Mt. Kailasa and the dust of whose feet settle on the bejewelled Makara-ornaments adorning Indra’s crest.[48]
________________
[1]The poem begins with a praise of Shiva’s ocular fire to highlight the importance of fire in the destruction of the Tripuras, to indicate that all fires, including the fire of Shiva’s arrow, owe their origin to his ocular fire, and to suggest that the fire which destroyed even Kama as if he were a mere locust can easily destroy the Tripuras. The use of the word ‘anaṅga’ for Kama, that describes his state after being burnt down by Shiva, is for the purpose of alliteration (with ‘pataṅga’ and ‘khaṭvāṅgino’) (JR).
[2]The fire of Shiva’s third eye blazes forth smokeless in the absence of a feeding fuel because of its supernatural power. The figure of speech employed in this verse is ‘vibhāvanā’ since the effect - the production of tears – materializes even in the absence of the cause - the appearance of smoke. The use of the verb form ‘dahatāt’ (‘may it burn down’) is appropriate for the subject, namely, fire (JR).
[3] Unmālaka, a rare word, is explained by JR as ‘pāritoṣakapradāna’, ‘offering a gift’. The use of ‘ratiprāṇasama’ (‘as dear as life to Rati’) to describe Kama underscores the latter’s amorous nature and thereby a predilection for offering gifts (JR).
[4] The flames are similar to fresh leaves in shape and colour alike (JR).
[5]Aurva is the submarine fire ‘whose fuel is water’ (jalendhana). The use of ‘tṛpyati’ with the genitive ‘bāṣpāmbupūrasya’ is in accordance to the rule ‘pūraṇaguṇa---‘(Aṣṭādhyāyī, 2.2.11) (JR).  Just as no amount of water is enough for the submarine fire, so no amount of teary water shed by the (widowed) wives of Danavas can satisfy the fire of Shiva’s arrow. The overall purport of the verse is that Shiva’s fiery arrow is never tired of exterminating the Danavas.
[6]The adjective ‘śiraḥsthā’ is used in the dual sense of ‘situated on the head’ and ‘respected’. By describing River Ganga as circumambulating Shiva in spite of the latter honouring her by placing her on his head, the poet conveys the special respect she has for him (JR).
[7] Shiva’s laughter is both far-reaching and bright white wherefore it can pervade the directions and whiten them. Holy ash is white too and Shaivites compulsorily smear their bodies with it (JR).
[8] The poetic fancy of Ganga’s waves appearing like the boisterous laughter of Shiva’s crest-moon is made possible on account of the former’s brightness and noisiness (JR).
[9] Both holy ash and the slough of serpents are white.
[10] Moonstones melt when moon rays fall on them. The verse alludes to one of the four forms of liberation called ‘sārūpya’ in which the devotee attains the form of the god whom he/she worships. Mankha uses the ideas of sārūpya and sāyujya (attaining the qualities of the god whom one worships) in other places too (e.g., 1.28, 1.53, 3.70, 3.73, 9.47)
[11]‘Sa nīlakaṇṭhaḥ’ is ‘that Blue-throated Shiva’ whereas ‘sanīlakaṇṭhaḥ’ (written without a gap) is ‘peacock’s ally’. The story of king Marutta is narrated in the Mahabharata (14.4-14.10). According to it, Marutta was bestowed with plentiful gold by Shiva to help him perform Vedic sacrifices. JR also understands by the word ‘marutta’ a windy place (‘marutvantaṃ deśaṃ’). The Kalpadruma lexicon derives the word etymologically as ‘marudastyasya’ (‘That which is exposed to wind’). Shiva is spoken of as having rained down gold for seven days in another verse (5.33) 
[12]Here ‘jahat’ is used both in the sense of ‘abandon’ and ‘giving away something in charity’, the former agreeing with Kama who abandoned his body in the fire of Shiva’s third eye and the latter with Bodhisattva who gave away even his own body in charity to a needy supplicant (JR).
[13]Ganga’s foamy mass is fancied as a swan because of the shared quality of whiteness (JR). Shiva wears Brahma’s skull on his head
[14] The poet indirectly conveys that the fire of Shiva’s third eye is similar to the submarine fire; Prior habituation (sātmya) with the former can protect Ganga when she reaches the ocean and meets the latter (JR)
[15] According to JR, the word ‘dvija’ is used in the dual sense of ‘Brahmin’ and ‘star’ (also under 12.71, 14.61, 14.62) However, the use of ‘dvija’ in the sense of ‘star’ is rather uncommon. ‘Dvijarāja’ in the sense of ‘moon’ can be derived even without resorting to such a usage.
[16] One sleeps on a bed at night when it is dark (JR). The set of 17 verses praising Shiva and his form ends with this verse.
[17] The poet, in an indirect way, describes the goddess’s face as free of any blemish whatsoever. Since her face is similar to the moon and since the moon is marked by a dark spot, which is equated with a deer in the Sanskrit language, the poet provides a poetic justification for the absence of such a deer in her moon-face (JR). 
[18]Daṇḍapāda refers to a dance pose in which the foot is lifted up. Since this pose is assumed at the commencement of a dance, and since the goddess dances in the evening, the crescent moon described here may imply the moon risen partially in the evening. Alternatively, it may refer to the crest moon worn by the goddess or Shiva (dancing alongside her). The breaking off of the anklet suggests the dancing frenzy, the robustness of her dance moves, and the loftiness of her foot, lifted up beyond the moon’s orbit (JR)
[19]The poet here negates the fact that her skull bowl is what it is and superimposes moonness on it (JR). One must imagine the goddess as holding her skull bowl high up so it can be filled up by the radiant glow of the gems on the hoods of the snakes adorning her matted locks. The set of three verses on goddess Parvati ends with this verse.
[20]The white flywhisk is counted among the royal insignia of a sovereign emperor (cakravartin). The others include elephant, bull, white horse, chariot, white parasol, throne, fan, flywhisk, golden vase, crown, diadem, conch, drum, cane stick, sword, shield, and bow (Khare, 1977-1978, p.689)
[21]The lotus, as described here, enjoys a higher status than the faces of women because it is the standard of comparison (upamāna). The figure of speech here is pariṇāma (JR). JR makes a remark under this verse that he is not interested in deliberating on figures of speech anywhere in his commentary. 
[22] The moon is the enemy of lotuses since it causes them to close, thereby depriving them of beauty. Mankha employs the word ‘antaraṅga/gī’ repeatedly in the sense of ‘close companion’, and to express similarity in a secondary sense (see also 7.1, 12.57, 14.67, 15.2, 16.34, 17.43, 20.65, 24.39).
[23]The verb root ‘gam’ when preceded by the prefix ‘sam’ becomes ātmanepada by the rule ‘samo gami ---’ (Aṣṭādhyāyī, 1.3.29) (JR). ‘Saṅgasīṣṭa’ is the āśīrliṅ (benedictive mood), ātmanepada form in the third person, singular. Constrained poetry (citra) is regarded as an inferior form of poetry (adhamakāvya) since it revels in verbal gymnastics of various kinds with little regard for the aesthetic communication of character mental states. 
[24]The entire universe is contained within the belly of Vishnu at the time of apocalypse (JR). The set of 5 verses on Brahma ends with this verse.
[25]The idea in this verse is based on the belief that Vishnu’s joints are home to rivers - ‘nadyaḥ sarvāṅgasandhiṣu’ (Mahabharata, 12.47.41)
[26]Vishnu assumed the female form, called ‘Mohinī’, to hoodwink the Daityas during the churning of the ocean. Mankha uses the word ‘Viśokā’ as a synonym for Mohinī. The Nīlamata regards Vishoka as a riverine incarnation of Lakshmi (verses 286, 290). According to JR, the fact that Vishnu still holds onto something that should have been forsaken long ago suggests his compassionate nature (due to which he doesn’t abandon his devotee even after his work is done). The poet alludes to this female incarnation of Vishnu also in 11.16 
[27]If Vishnu is the garland of blue lilies, the Kaustubha gem can be regarded as a cluster of red flowers hanging like a central pendant from the garland (JR). ‘To steal away kohl from the eyes of Daitya women’ is a roundabout way of saying ‘to make them widows’.
[28]Shesha, the lord of serpents, is an epitome of whiteness wherefore he is compared to a pearl necklace.
[29]Idea based on the belief that Vishnu’s tresses are home to clouds - ‘yasya keśeṣu jīmūtāḥ’ (Mahabharata, 12.47.41). Verses 5.3 and 5.19 are also based on the same belief. The set of six verses on Vishnu ends with this verse.
[30] Brahma and Lakshmi alike dwell in the lotus.
[31] Here ‘āvahantī’ is used in the sense of ‘making’ (the body black) and not in the usual sense of ‘possessing’ (JR). Thus ends a pair of verses on Lakshmi
[32]‘Kam’ is ‘water’ and ‘vi’ ‘bird’, thus ‘kavi’ is ‘water bird’.
[33]The attraction of swans to the sound of anklets is a commonly employed poetic convention in Sanskrit (also in 1.46).
[34]The reading ‘ajñānarajaḥ’ has been chosen over ‘ajñānirajaḥ’ in keeping with an alternate reading suggested by JR. 
[35]The set of four verses on goddess Sarasvati ends with this verse
[36]‘Prāgabhāva’ is a technical term used in Indian logic and refers to the prior non-existence of a thing before it comes into being. The poet’s idea is that with Ganesha around, obstacles can never come into being. Elephants are smeared with vermilion to decorate them. Mankha uses a similar expression, incorporating the idea of ‘Prāgabhāva’ in 4.52 too.
[37]In Sanskrit poetry, bees are often described as attracted to ichor. The swarm of bees is compared to an iron chain on account of its length, blackness, and arrangement of the constituting units (each bee in the series appears like a link in the chain) (JR). With this verse ends the set of three verses on Ganesha.
[38]The Daitya women rained down tears because they were widowed by Skanda. Janaki (1966, p.67) has discussed about references to the rivalry between Parashurama and Skanda in Sanskrit literature.
[39]The apparent contradiction in describing Skanda as (a) being both a child as well as old in age and (b) being capable of granting a life that branches out into hundred years in spite of himself being ‘branchless’ can be solved by considering the alternate meanings, respectively, (a) being known by the name of Kumara and riding a peacock, and (b) being known by the name of Vishakha and granting a long life to his devotees (JR).
[40] Kama, the lord of love, is described as the chamberlain guarding Brahma’s creation because the latter will come to a complete stop if he fails to bless it. Aṅkakāra is a seasoned combatant (vyutannayoddhā) (JR) or contestant (spardhākāra, JR, under 7.11). 
[41]JR describes payaśchaṭā as ‘a rain of ambrosia’ (‘amṛtavṛṣṭi’) According to him, a discourse on devotion to Shiva is like a rain of ambrosia to the snakes that are disbelievers because it will only serve to torment them, given they are venomous (and venom and ambrosia don’t go together). The problem with such an explanation is that ‘payas’ in almost never used in the sense of ambrosia. Rather, its common meanings are ‘water’ and ‘milk’. Understood in the backdrop of the common Sanskrit adage ‘payaḥpānaṃ bhujaṅgānāṃ kevalaṃ viṣavardhanam’ (‘Snakes drink milk only to increase their stock of venom’), a possible alternative explanation is that a discourse on devotion to Shiva brings out the worst in disbelievers since they cannot bear listening to it.
[42]Kairavasādakṛt is taken a single word in the case of night and split as kaiḥ avasādakṛt in the case of Vishnu. The word ‘śyāmā’ is used both as a noun (‘night’) and an adjective (‘dark-hued’). The night is strange because its features (such as fostering the union of chakravaka couples, etc.) are all contrary to that of a regular night. 
[43]A restating of the idea expressed in 1.18 
[44]Twilight is often described as a co-beloved of Parvati, eliciting jealousy in the latter, especially when Shiva pays her homage
[45]Similar to the idea developed in 1.15 except that there, Ganga habituates herself to Shiva’s ocular fire so she can withstand the submarine fire when she enters the ocean whereas here, the ocean habituates itself to the submarine fire so it can somehow withstand the heat of Shiva’s ocular fire.   
[46]An allusion to the Puranic tale of Indra clipping the wings of mountains with his thunderbolt.
[47]The thick, muscular chest prevents the glow of Shiva’s toenails from spreading upwards and making the half-moon on his crest full, the suggestion being that the glow of his toenails is akin to moonlight and therefore, his toenails themselves are akin to full moons.
[48]The feminine gender of ‘giraḥ’ (words) heightens the impropriety of putting them for a sale (JR). There is also a contrast suggested through the words ‘pṛthvībhṛt’ (king/mountain) and ‘adribhid’ (Indra, the smasher of mountains). Whereas other poets put their words for sale before kings/mountains, Mankha’s poetry is savoured by Shiva, whose feet rest on the crown of Indra, the smasher of mountains. This places Mankha much above other poets. 


#========
Canto02


1. Victorious are the discerning poets/water birds – adept in separating out milk from water (i.e., grasp the essence and leave out what is inessential) as if they were instructed in it by the swans that are the vehicles of goddess Sarasvati, seated in their hearts.[1]  
2. Poetry’s ambrosia - stolen by the wicked, standing for the demon Rahu – would not have been available to the learned/gods if the circle of virtuous men/divine discus – endowed naturally with immense sharpness - had not been there.[2]
3. The wicked man, though intent on developing acquaintance with the virtuous, never ever abandons his ways. Though Rahu approached Surya, the Sun-god, with great difficulty, did that make him eligible for godhood/scholarliness?[3]
4. Poetry’s profound secret is revealed to a rare soul through the power of creative reflection. And this secret is known, or perhaps not, by someone who toils endlessly in the homes of masters.[4]
5. Those that take to composing poetry without being aware of scholarship’s hidden essence (verily) proceed to taste the deadliest venom without practising Garuda’s sacred chants.[5]
6. How can they that do not possess precious gems in the form of ideas and are short of golden words attain lordship over poets merely on account of their brazen style – a style that only serves to impoverish them?[6]
7. The poet’s poem is rendered free of chaff (only) when it is touched by lofty thoughts of each and every kind. A gem can never attain brightness unless it is mounted on a whetstone.[7]
8. It is only a rare person whose speech – abundantly furnished with ideas/ingredients and an abode of perfection/a place for cooking – shines forth by its emotional richness/like a kitchen. Many are the people who zealously sanctify their mouths with a few morsels picked up from it.[8] 
9. Only in the pristine pure poetry of bards do others (with impure minds) instantly spot a fault resulting from oversight. How can someone easily make out a drop of kohl that’s fallen on a dirty piece of cloth?
10.  Wicked men are like buffaloes searching spiritedly for mistakes, akin to slush. But their wish is rendered futile in the case of the Celestial River that is the masterly poet’s verse.[9]
11.  Though free of blemish and continuously oozing aesthetic delight/ ambrosia – one which scholars/gods depend upon for their sustenance – does speech, like the moon’s crescent, stand out if it is devoid of the beauty imparted by striking contortion/curvedness?[10] 
12.  By no means can the poet’s merit find fulfilment in anyone else other than the learned connoisseur. An oil drop does not spread over anything else as quickly as it does over water.
13.  Composed in memorable meters/established in good conduct and never given to using harsh words even under constraint, the speech of a rare individual – who reaps the sweet fruits of his past actions – obeys him at all times like a faithful wife.[11]
14.   What use of speech that, bereft of all other worthy qualities, displays an extreme, useless contortion/crookedness and therefore eludes grasp like a dog’s puny tail?[12] 
15.   When speech that lacks training to tread even on a straight path wishes to take a convoluted one, what fate awaits it other than stumbling, like a lame person, at every step/word?
16.  How can the tongue of wicked men not be the very first messenger of incessant fear to the virtuous? For, the Creator has himself made backbiting its full-time career.
17.  How great is the Creator’s deep-rooted compassion on the virtuous! To this day he does not bless the (destructive) monkey that is the wicked man with the fresh wings of knowledge.[13]
18.  Alas! The wicked man is hell-bent on causing frustration to the virtuous even though they cause him no harm. Overthrown by his notoriety for cruelty, the serpentine kind slithered into the netherworld, out of shame as it were[14]. 
19.  Let the lowly person, akin to kohl, cause tears and indulge in excessive blackening. The eye of genius shall however gain no clarity of vision until he, like the kohl he resembles, is crushed.[15] 
20.  Some (good) people put on a fake display of harshness though they are secretly soft-natured. Though the sugarcane is full of nectarine juice within, it is rough without.
21.  How firmly established, alas, is the shiver-inducing age of Kali, standing for the winter season, in which the assembly of wicked men thrives like the (long-drawn) night and the righteous man, like the day, lives a short life![16] 
22.   There is however one commendable quality which these dogs – the wicked men – possess: They bark when, in front of them, plagiarists attempt to steal the treasury of others’ good sayings.[17]
23.  Dear friend! Look at this wicked man – a knower of divine magic par excellence. In gatherings of people, he emits intolerable fire from his mouth without using any herb or muttering any holy chant whatsoever.[18]
24.  In spite of pondering over it for many times, I cannot decide if the wicked person is steady or unsteady. If he is really steady, why is his friendship momentary? And if unsteady, why does his anger last as long as an eon?[19]
25.  The evil man must occupy the office of the Creator’s teacher since he possess a rather unique nature: He fabricates letters of doom, which even the Creator couldn’t, on the foreheads of the righteous.[20]
26.  Let the inimical man, if he so desires, point out his finger at the words of a common poet. How can a poetic work that is completely flawless satisfy the hunger of the wicked?[21]
27.  How can someone who, for long, has not fed greedily on the breasts – poetry and scholarship – of Mother Muse and whose every physical/poetic limb is therefore poorly nourished, gain considerable maturity with every passing day?[22] 
28.  Though given to grazing anything and everything without discretion, the cow that is speech, obeying the will of some fortunate person, yields the miraculous milk of aesthetic joy that, like some new kind of ambrosia, enriches the world in so many ways.[23] 
29.  What can those poets who are endowed with discretion but lack creativity and choose to compose poetry without understanding the organization of words or acquainting themselves with the nature of meaning produce, other than something unsubstantial and deprived of sentiment?[24]
30.  Where meaning exists, clarity of words doesn’t; where the latter is present, style isn’t; where style can be made out, composition is questionable; and where even that is a possibility, striking contortion is nowhere to be seen. And all of this is futile without sentiment. Ah! Inscrutably deep indeed is poetry.
31.  Only he, who has the ability to compose profound poetry, is competent enough to impart aesthetic joy that is beyond comparison. The very sun that scorches the world with its fierce rays also bathes it in cool showers instantly.[25]
32.  Though adorned with the ornaments, namely, figures of speech, of this and that kind in their hundreds, though placed on a high pedestal because of its grand structure, and though embodying excellence/scholarship, a literary work cannot claim to be ‘the King of all poems’ without receiving an ablution in a steady shower of sentiment.[26]
33.  It’s okay if the pitiable verse of a petty poet, who manages to compose poetry with effort, is regulated by style. However, can Divine Muse, billowing up without restraint, pay heed to such cheap gimmicks (i.e., gimmicks such as obeying rules pertaining to a specific style)?
34.  Praiseworthy is the bow that is the masterly poet’s composition, characterized by obliquity and compact robustness. No sooner does its string of merits touch the ear than the hearts of envious men break asunder. 
35.  Let many men – their intellects sharpened by the knowledge garnered from a thorough study of specific disciplines - compose poetry. However, even in their dreams they cannot get anywhere close to the secret that characterizes the speech of a great poet.
36.  Some men, desirous to be known as poets but unfamiliar with the rules of poetry, jump around feverishly like monkeys. Fie upon them! They are like fledglings - their wings unformed as yet – that make many a determined attempt to soar high up only to fall down again and again.[27]
37.  It is never possible to distinguish between a petty poet and a great one without conducting a stringent test. Until a strong gale of wind arrives, who can comprehend the gem that serves as a lamp from a lamp of fire?
38.  Understand that scholarship is like pepper because of its intense sharpness and sentiment like sugarcane because of its sweetness. If poets are successful in blending the two together, their words will automatically acquire the semblance of a panaka drink.[28] 
39.  He alone deserves the praise “Emperor of the circle of poets”, his bright fame touching the sky like a white parasol, by whose mere will a special battalion comprising of words and meanings voluntarily makes its appearance before him that very moment.
40.  Milked in many ways, the speech/cow of several men pours out a scanty flow of poetic sayings after a long time. Only rarely does someone become a masterly poet, capable of gifting away the milky ocean that is his new work – deep in emotion/current and free of faults/white in colour.[29]
41.  The jewel adorning the neck of learned men is fashioned from delightful gems, namely, ideas strung together on the thread of words that are no strangers to the Vaidarbha way. Could we have come across such a jewel – polished repeatedly as it were on the whetstone of scholarship – if Sarasvati had not imparted it with the sheen of her side-glance?[30]
42.  Gone are those few men of a truthful grasp, who, in earlier times, squeezed the sugarcane that is poetry’s core to extract every bit of its juicy essence. But nowadays, poets are born one after another only to collect in bulk the bagasse in the form of alliterations, tough figurative verses, repetitive letter strings, and puns.[31] 
43.  Everyone (desirous of composing poetry) treads the path which the society/village of other poets has laid out. But then there is this one praiseworthy man who puts the immense wealth of poetic genius to incredible use: His gift (to the world) is a poetic masterpiece – a colossal bridge with whose help many people confidently cross the deep stream of literature/river Sarasvati.
44.  Fortunate are those few whose words are determined to drench the ears of sensitive connoisseurs with ambrosia as if to atone for their serious sin, namely, an endless torturing of the (envious) wicked. Such words – their freshly emerging obliquities (of form and sense) distinguished by fine scholarship – reside in the wise man’s throat.[32]
45.  Having ascended the glorious throne of untiring scholarship, a rare hero becomes the emperor among poets. And lays his hand on a literary charm, inaccessible to others, as if it were a special gift presented to him by Goddess Speech.[33] 
46.  He who, though silent when it comes to uttering words that artfully assimilate scholarship, confidently composes poetry merely because of his skill in achieving a degree of deviant strikingness is akin to someone who, having discarded the armour and forsaken all wartime activity, bubbles with excitement at the thought of conquering the world with a wooden sword.[34] 
47.  How true! Only if a poet is distinguished by scrupulous erudition does the striking deviation of his speech manifest vividly. The moon’s digit, though incomplete, is characterized everywhere as blamelessly beautiful because of its association with the crest of Lord Shiva - Master of the movable and immovable universe.[35] 
48.  By no means can perfection manifest in the words of a poet who hasn’t toiled to grasp the essence of each and every great discipline. How can sweet juice drip from an unripe wood-apple fruit, lacking the excellence of channels whose maturity is triggered by the appropriate (i.e., rainy) season?[36]
49.  As long as aesthetic sentiment – resembling a shower of dazzling elixir pouring down and resonating with the ornaments, namely, literary tropes, whose very handsome strings are the poetic qualities – is absent, the poet’s speech, brimming though with liveliness in the beginning, fails (ultimately) to entertain the minds of learned men. 
50.  Only those before me do I consider to be poets whose words – dripping with nectar and developed to the fullest – possess, like the songs of cuckoos, a growing aesthetic charm; and not others, because of whose insurmountable incomprehensibility, the minds (of listeners) are thrown into confusion.[37] 
51.  There are dozens of poets who can compose a four liner after mugging up a few verses of others every day. The words of only the rarest of the rare are familiar with the ways of the sea’s steadily surging surf, captivate hearts, and possess clarity.
52.  When divine eloquence flows forth from the great poet - a veritable Brihaspati – who, may I ask, with mortal eyes is capable of adequately grasping or glorifying it? And how on earth can we find the Lord of serpents? For, it is he who perchance can listen to this poet with his two thousand eyes and praise him with his two thousand tongues.[38]
53.  Mentha/the mahout has ascended the celestial elephant; Subandhu has been outdone by fate; Bharavi has dimmed out; and Bana has been cut off (from us), wherefore Goddess Speech is devastated. Even so, let her sorrowful, vacant glances stop, for there still breathes someone (i.e., me) whose poetry, like an eloquent and faithful female messenger, can cheer her up.[39] 
54.  If the thirty-three crores of gods always perceive Kavya (i.e., Shukra) with minds sullied by hatred, so be it. Who are we to comment on the doings of divine beings? But sadly, there is not one scholar whom the Creator has created even here, on the face of the earth, who can perceive poetry with a mind free of contamination.[40]
55.  He, before whom the assembly of words and meanings assumes servanthood by constantly obeying his every command at the slightest twitch of an eyebrow, is known in the world as the glorious emperor of poets. And his very own (bright) fame is the redoubled lustre of the white parasol (that signifies emperorship).[41]
56.  Can Sarasvati stay at ease in the dilapidated house that is the poem which is not robust, has words of doubtful meaning/stands on a shaky foundation, and cannot bear scrutiny/wear and tear? And is supported somehow by the pillars, namely, supplementary comments, which more capable others – artisans who know the secrets of the poetic craft – furnish?[42]
57.  Let Words of a different kind limp on poetry’s mystical path. But how, may I ask, can that extraordinary Speech – frolicking at ease with unbridled freedom in literature’s every lane, thanks to the magical foot balm of eloquence that makes her gait unfaltering - be curtailed in her movement/expression? 
58.  The flawless wonder that is creativity is a fabulous gem of reunion which the Goddess of speech bestows upon those who propitiate her in a hundred different ways. Such are the men whom Lady Muse approaches with complete trust the very moment they remember her even casually though she may be far away from them due to their prolonged suspension of practice.[43]  
________________
[1]Swans are known to separate out milk from a mixture of milk and water. ‘Seated in their heart’ is used to stress the fact that poets have committed the instruction to their hearts (JR)
[2]Virtuous men, with sharp intellect (capable of identifying the actual author of a poem), argue on behalf of poets when wicked men claim authorship falsely. The verse, through pun, alludes to the story of Sudarshana, Vishnu’s discus, killing the Asura Rahu, bringing ambrosia back from him, and handing it over to the Devas (‘tataḥ pibatsu tatkālaṃ deveṣvamṛtamīpsitam | rāhurvibudharūpeṇa dānavaḥ prāpibattadā || tasya kaṇṭhamanuprāpte dāvasyāmṛte tadā  | ākhyātaṃ candrasūryābhyāṃ surāṇāṃ hitakāmyayā || tato bhagavata tasya śiraśchinnam - - - cakreṇa - - - ||, Mahabhārata, 1.19.5-7)
[3]Alludes to the same story discussed under footnote to verse 2.2. Rahu, with much difficulty, hides close to the Sun but is unable to attain godhood in spite of drinking ambrosia since his presence is revealed by the Sun and the Moon and Vishnu cuts off his head with the Sudarshana discus.
[4]Śakti is used here in the dual sense of ‘creativity’ and ‘the power of reflection’(vimarśa); the latter use is rooted in the Trika philosophy. It is through continuous reflection on the I-Self that the secret knowledge of one’s Shiva-nature is revealed. Here, the word ‘guru’ stands not just for an instructor in poetics but also for a spiritual master.
[5]The purport is that one must possess vast and deep scholarship before one can proceed to write poetry. Garuda’s mantras are an antidote to poison.
[6]It is through the possession of gems and gold that one comes to be known as a rich lord; a brazen (also ‘made of brass’) verse, whose only claim to fame is style, characterizes the inferior poet 
[7]Elsewhere too, Mankha employs ‘nistuṣa’ and ‘upaniṣat’ in a secondary sense of ‘faultless’ (19.44, 25.33, 25.86) and ‘secret’ (2.48, 10.55, 14.36, 25.121)  
[8]An example of word-based suggestion (śabdaśaktimūla dhvani) since the comparison of speech to kitchen is suggested by the use of words with two meanings but not literally spelt out through the use of simile markers such as ‘iva’ (JR). Mankha has a fondness for employing cooking-based similes (5.12, 25.47, 25.83, 25.141).
[9]Ganga is an epitome of cleanliness. According to JR, buffaloes cannot find slush in Ganga because it is a heavenly river. However, this explanation doesn’t seem to be too good because (1) Buffaloes cannot access the heavenly Ganga and (2) Ganga does descend to the earth from the heaven
[10]Poetic speech differs from everyday speech by its obliquity (vakratā): Nothing is said directly and blandly in poetry. Mankha employs the word ‘ṭaṅka’ frequently (e.g., 6.33, 11.11, 12.19, 22.42). JR too uses ‘ṭaṅka’ frequently as a synonym for words like mudrā (16.40) and krama (16.3)
[11]Meters such as the (14-syllable) Vasantatilaka (JR)
[12]A puny tail is inevitably bent and doesn’t serve any useful purpose such as warding off gnats. Speech, lacking other literary merits, is not praiseworthy merely on account of its obliquity (JR). 
[13]Monkeys are destructive by their very nature. If they had wings too, the world would be in chaos (JR).
[14]Serpents reside in the netherworld (Pātāla); Mankha gives a poetic reason for why they do so – serpents bite others when they are harmed but wicked men torment others even without being harmed by them; this makes the serpents hide in shame (JR).
[15]Kohl is crushed and made into a powder before being applied to the eyes; it can irritate the eyes and cause watering. The purport of the verse is that wicked men are always trying to find mistakes in the poet’s writing and the poet too, by anticipating this, takes care to avoid mistakes while composing his work; this, in turn, frustrates the wicked men since they are unable to point out mistakes in a carefully crafted work – all this is meant by the word ‘kṣoda’ (‘crushing’) (JR). In the case of kohl, the phrase ‘nitāntakārṣṇyam aśru tanotu’ can also mean ‘Let it produce deep black tears’
[16]The age of Kali (which is the last among the four cyclical epochs, known as yugas) exemplifies evil and ethical deprivation. Nights are longer in summer and days shorter.
[17]The wicked man, because of his very nature, cannot but publicize others faults, be it even the plagiarist (who too is equally immoral).
[18]Here fire stands for harsh, hurtful words (JR).
[19]The purport of the verse is that wicked men are unstable in their friendship but stable in their enmity
[20]The Creator is often described as writing the fate of people on their foreheads.
[21]‘Hantakāra’ is a rare word, used here in the sense of alms. JR quotes from the Markandeya Purana – “A mouthful is called bhikṣā; four mouthfuls make an agra; and four agras make one hantakāra”. The idea is that wicked men should look for petty poets if they wish to satisfy their hunger for pointing out mistakes since flawless literary masterpieces can be of no use to them. 
[22]Maturity, in the case of poetry, refers to abilities such concisement and elaboration as and when needed (JR). 
[23]In this and the next verse, Mankha argues that great poetry results from the blessings of Goddess Sarsasvati. Poeticians like Vamana have differentiated between two types of poets, the ‘satṛṇābhyavahārin’ (literally ‘one who ingests everything, including grass’) and the ‘arocakin’ (literally ‘given to indigestion’, and therefore sensitive). The former type is regarded as non-discerning (avivekin) and the latter as discerning (vivekin). Mankha opines that a poet who is blessed with the gift of creativity can produce great poetry about anything and everything whereas a poet who is not so blessed cannot create anything substantial in spite of being discerning as regards the topic he chooses. 
[24]In JR’s commentary, ‘te’rocakino’pi avivekapūrvam’ must be read as ‘te’rocakino’pi vivekapūrvam’
[25]A hot weather results in rainfall (JR)
[26]Kings receive a ritual oblation when they are coronated
[27]‘Kavipadādhigamaspṛhāyāḥ kāpeyam’ is literally ‘monkeyness due to a desire to be known as poets’ (JR) 
[28]The pānaka drink is prepared by mixing ingredients such as pepper, sugar, camphor, cardamom, cold water, and juice squeezed out from various fruits. It is therefore a combination of various tastes.
[29]Many are the poets who compose stray verses but very few compose a full-fledged literary narrative of epic dimensions
[30]The idea here is that the sheen which ideas, akin to gems, are rubbed on the whetstone of scholarship acquire is imparted to them by the compassionate side glances of Sarasvati. The Vaidarbha way is the literary style known as Vaidarbhī that is characterized by sweetness, short compounds, and ease of comprehension.
[31]Anuprāsa is alliteration; citra is a category of poetry that relies on verbal gymnastics of various kinds, particularly those in which letters in a verse are so arranged as to evolve a pattern resembling objects such as a lotus or a drum; in yamaka, the same string of letters is repeated to yield a different meaning; śleṣa is pun. All of these play on words.
[32]The poet’s words cause endless suffering to envious others.
[33]Emperors receive gifts from others (JR) 
[34]An attempt to compose poetry without first acquiring scholarship is as futile as a desire to conquer the world with a wooden sword.
[35]Oblique speech is akin to the moon’s digit and though the former may be meagre (kṣīṇā) just as the latter is incomplete (kṣīṇā), their association, respectively with erudition and Shiva makes them praiseworthy. The word ‘kṣīṇā’ thus qualifies both speech and the digit of the moon (JR).
[36]The word ‘srotas’ refers to the various channels in the (wood-apple) tree through which the growing fruit obtains nourishment.
[37]vimuhyati śēmuṣī = śrōtr̥̄ṇāṁ matirmuhyati
[38]Brihaspati, the preceptor of gods, is known for his eloquence. Shesha, the lord of serpents, has a thousand hoods. One of the Sanskrit synonyms for serpent is ‘cakṣuḥśravas’, literally, ‘ear-eyed’ since it is supposed to hear with its eyes. The idea is that only the one with so many ears and tongues can do full justice to such poetry by way of listening and appreciation. 
[39]Mankha indirectly hints that he is much better than Mentha and others (JR). Mentha, Subandhu, and Bharavi, composed Hayagrīvavadha, Vāsavadattā, and Kirātārjunīya respectively. Bana is the author of two prose poems, Kādambarī and Harṣacarita. Mankha has used appropriate alternative expressions for death in each poet’s case: ‘svardviradādhirohiṇi’ (‘ascended the heavenly elephant’) for Mentha (also ‘mahout’); ‘vidheḥ vaśaṃ yāte’ (‘was outdone by fate’) for Subandhu (also ‘close relative’); śānte (‘dimmed out’) for Bharavi (also ‘bright sun’); and ‘vighaṭite’ (‘was cut off’) for Bana (also ‘arrow’).
[40]Mankha plays on the word ‘kāvya’ which is one of the synonyms of Shukra, preceptor of the Asuras (and therefore hated by the Devas), apart from meaning ‘poetry’, as well as on the word ‘vibudha’ that means both ‘god’ and ‘scholar’. 
[41]According to poetic convention, fame is white in colour.  
[42]Bad poetry cannot sustain for long on the strength of clever arguments 
[43] The Saṅgamanīyaratna is a fabled gem that reunites separated lovers. It plays an important part in Kalidasa’s drama, the Vikramorvaśīya. 


#========
Canto03


1. There exists a province called Satisaras – forehead ornament of the Direction beloved to Kubera (i.e., North) – that (also) goes by the name of Kashmira. It is the Creator’s holy ablution at the culmination of his manifold creation (that is akin to a sacrifice).
2. Therein, owing to the presence of numerous sacrificial posts – proudly rising their blessed, lofty heads up – the directions seem to have automatically sprouted wooden bolts on their surface so as to not give the wicked age of Kali any space to enter in.[1] 
3. Because of the rampart-like range of densely snow-capped mountains surrounding it, Kashmira seems to be circumambulated by the Milky Ocean, over which it is gained victory,  thanks to its (superior) wealth of gems.[2]
4. There, in the homes of soma-drinking Brahmins, the (spreading) mass of dark smoke arising from the three sacred fires endows young boys with an effortlessly fashioned skin of black deer and wipes away every single speck of sin/dust.[3]
5. And therein, are there any taverns for pleasure-seekers to hang out that don’t abound in oranges during the winter season - oranges appearing like large ruby pellets discharged by the bow-wielding Kama to gently break the hearts (of those that disobey him)?[4] 
6. Its (i.e., Kashmir’s) Land decorates the (foreheads of the) womenfolk residing in all the three worlds with an everlasting tilaka mark, thanks to its saffron filaments – rays shooting forth from the ruby-studded diadem of the native goddess.[5]
7. And there, the river Vitasta sports swarms of bees that gather around flowers falling down from the trees on its banks as if they (i.e., the swarms) were the dark tresses of celestial damsels rushing forth passionately to enjoy a dip in its waters.[6]
8. Endowed with fresh youth by the elixirs, namely, the amorous graces of its ladies, Kama verily sheds off his grey hair – disguised as the falling snow – during wintertime/the observance of austerity.[7] 
9. Mahapadma, the leader of serpents, conjures up a lake there, a lake encircled by thirsty clouds – akin to the bumblebees that solicit the lotuses blooming on his (i.e., Mahapadma’s) hood as a result of the wish-granting ritual, namely, a blow by Krishna’s foot.[8] 
10.  Having settled in its ground, Goddess Sharada weaves a web of magic by cleansing the eye of knowledge with the dense dust of her lotus-feet.[9] 
11.  Therein, during the northern solstice, the clarified butter smeared over the idols of Shiva doesn’t melt (even) under the influence of the fire in his third eye – frozen as if by the (cool) rays of the moon, residing at the tip of the (Lord’s) crown.[10]
12.  Abandoning the milky ocean – a crumbling cottage – Vishnu sanctifies the Kashmira province with his Chakradhara form, as if the Goddess of wealth (Lakshmi, his wife), who perpetually stays there, has charmed him by casting magical spells.[11]
13.  Under the pretext of the tall, innumerable mountains in its vicinity, Kashmira seems to raise its many hands up for granting protection to Kadru’s progeny from the fear of Garuda, thereby ensuring its proliferation.[12]
14.  And there, in the name of ‘Kapateshwara’, Shiva – saviour of the three worlds from the dreariness of sin - assumes a wooden persona and reclines under water as if to stop the fire in his third eye from blazing forth.
15.  Incarnating as Martanda, the Lord (i.e., the Sun god) who is the sole medicine for the malady of darkness takes up his abode in its neighbourhood, his scorching rays softened by a stream of light from the moon-like faces of the approaching city-bred beauties.[13]
16.  Therein dwells the famed Vamana, kept company by his reflection in the sacred pond before him as if, out of compassion, he were descending to the nether world – ruled by the lord of serpents - for freeing Bali.[14]
17.  Kashmira’s saffron filaments find their way to the farthest reaches of the world, appearing like Kama’s javelins streaked with the heart’s blood of lovelorn men. And owing to them (i.e., the saffron filaments), it enjoys a never-ending harvest of fame.
18.  As regards the kings ruling there, the slush of infamy never manifests in their case since an unrelenting drought (i.e., absence of tears) drags on and on in the eyes of the womenfolk populating its cities.[15]
19.  Since Sharada, her eyes drenched with an overflowing stream of nectarine grace, lets her side-glances fall on Kashmira, even the children living there don’t deny their ear cavities the sumptuous feast of scholarly discourse.
20.  Therein, the place where the two rivers (i.e., Sindhu and Vitasta) meet is undoubtedly a trail for Shiva – the bull-bannered god – to stroll around since it betrays the hoofmarks of his bull by way of its numerous, closely formed eddies.[16] 
21.  The famed city of Pravara is a jewel in its (Kashmira’s) crown, abundantly adorning the faces of all the Directions with its intensely brilliant qualities that are akin to rays/rays as it does with its golden strings.[17]
22.  Singularly victorious are the amorous graces of its (i.e., of the city of Pravarapura) Chakora-eyed ladies. Pundits in love’s scholarly lore, these graces stand surety to Kama’s boastful claims of heroism.[18] 
23.  In that city, neither the breasts of women with roving eyes nor the words of masterly poets – exuding excessive loveliness when pressed down by an embrace/pure aesthetic joy that steers clear of (verbal jugglery such as) pun – abandon their robustness at any time.[19]
24.  Therein shines the confluence of Mahasarit and Vitasta, beloved wives of the Ocean. By way of its dense whirlpools, it (i.e., this confluence) seems to freshly carve out circular basins for the grove of creepers, namely, righteous actions, to prosper.[20]
25.  At nights, on its terraces, sportive women put an end to the moon’s gloominess during the darker half of the month with the radiant light of their face, its veil drawn aside frolickingly.[21] 
26.  The wind blowing through that city hurls a mass of saffron dust here and there as if that mass were the lovelorn women’s (crimson) robe of execution. And it does not tolerate curvy-browed beauties beating the drum of fame for their untimely love anger.[22]
27.  Their expanse eulogized by the bees adhering to the blue lilies that adorn the ear, the eyes of its gazelle-eyed girls remove Rati’s insufferable malady of grief resulting from widowhood.[23]
28.  Its ponds are distinguished by a circle of (white) lotus stalks that evidently appear like a series of hoods lifted up by Shesha, lord of serpents, in order to wait upon Goddess Shri, Vishnu’s (i.e., his master’s) wife, whose seat is the lotus.
29.  Therein, during winter, the Hasantika baskets with numerous blazing holes appear like a row of fiery eyes which Kama acquired in order to defeat Shiva.[24] 
30.  Having admired the youthful charm that brightens up the pleasure garden of its deer-eyed damsels’ countenance in the manner of spring’s festivity, Kama, accompanied by his sweetheart, climbs onto the swing, namely, the corner of their eye, which is evenly elongated/held strongly by long ropes.
31.  There lived in this place the famed Manmatha who (unlike his namesake, the god of love) was a recipient of Shiva’s gracious glances and had no training in spurning scholarly supplicants/discharging flowery arrows.
32.  His father’s mind was always joyfully inclined towards him – an unparalleled son/a strange Nadana garden that knew no enemies/was bereft of the Parijata’s spreading canopy, displayed endurance/flourished on the earth, and was distinguished by surplus kindness/a leafless beauty.[25]
33.  With the ritual waters poured into the hands of Brahmins while making a gift to them – waters that appeared like tears of joy shed by Dharma – he watered the lush forest of merit and completely washed off the inner stain (of sin). 
34.  The crest-jewel of all Shaivas, he transformed every mountain into the Crystal Mountain (Mt. Kailasa) by means of his (white) fame, verily to please the Lord.[26]
35.  He begot a son by name Vishvavarta – made immortal by the spreading fame of his good sayings; a generous man, about whom one wondered if he were the massive stream of melting compassion that had become solidified.
36.  How many cows, with curved, golden horn tips – carrying goads as it were in order to restrain the movement of the rogue elephant, namely, the (wicked) Kali epoch – did he not donate to Brahmins repeatedly?[27]
37.  The Guru’s teaching was a potent salve which he had earned by the merit of his past actions. As the darkness of his ignorance melted away under its influence and his vision cleared, he was cured of his double vision and beheld the unity of Shiva’s form everywhere.[28]
38.  Through the teardrops of joy scattering over his chest in their hundreds during devotional discourses, he seemed to freely worship Shiva, seated in his heart, with a shower of precious pearls. 
39.  Quiet and unassuming due to his refined intellect, he always kept his face down believing, as it were, that great men, by their pious actions, had completely filled up the higher regions as far below as the crown of his head.[29]
40.  to 44. Akin to swarms of bees summoned by the blooming creeper of devotion, copious coils of smoke billowed up from the incense that burned during his ritualistic worship of Shiva. Approaching the feet (of  Shiva as identified with his image), they cleverly mimicked the locks of all the celestials bending down; over the arms, they duplicated the dark serpents that formed a row of bracelets; nearing the neck, they slowly conjured up a second poison arising out of the blue; on the sides of the cheeks, they assumed the loveliness of a freshly sprouting beard; on the forehead’s broad, tablet-like surface, they became a momentary ornament - resembling Parvati’s sprout-like musk mark stamped therein when the Lord rubbed his forehead against her forehead design; in the vicinity of the Moon adorning the crown, they bespoke the glory of Lady Night drawing close  (to her lover, the Moon) for conveying her love; and on the banks of the Celestial River in the matted tresses, they put up a skilful display of impatient clouds come to imbibe water.[30]
45.  He first fathered a son, Shringara by name, who was noble in his conduct, occupied a very high post. His (i.e., Shringara’s) countenance beamed with the lustre born of truth and eloquence, so it seemed he had partaken of Shiva’s androgynous nature.[31]
46.  Sarasvati and Lakshmi came together and made him their island of refuge - kissed by the waves of poesy and oratory on one side and the waves of munificence and enjoyment on the other.[32]
47.  to 50. Emperor Sussala – whose curved eyebrow, like a black serpentess, thoroughly thwarted the Valour of king Harsha midway and dispatched it (i.e., the Valour) from battle to a place of no return; who, having unstoppably taken the hand of Goddess Victory in marriage/complemented his ample courage with tributary taxes (collected from enemies) merrily watched the dance of headless trunks in the thick of continuously waged wars/in the unbroken company of his associates; and whose angry glance was unbearable to everyone on whom it fell as if, having repeatedly consumed the fiery valour of many an enemy king, it was now spewing out that valour – bestowed on him (i.e., Shringara) the office of the chief judge by presenting him a flower garland, swarmed around by drunken bees that looked like Fate’s blessed letters.[33]
51.  He fills the world with the din of surprise for, though he sports short threads/is a fast achiever, he is renowned for his long threads/widely recognized qualities; though endowed with shallow knowledge/he is the chief justice, he grasps the essentials; and though naturally fond of weapons/scholarship, he is soft and subdued in his behaviour.[34] 
52.  and 53. Bhringa (meaning “bee”), his younger sibling, possesses a character that matches perfectly with his name. For, (like a bee) he delights everywhere in the sight of the approaching spring/a happily settled kinsman; wipes away the pollen dust/gloom of flowers/learned men; and does not denounce the pressing desire for an elephant in rut/overcoming pride even after stumbling upon a lotus in full bloom/unbound wealth. Surprisingly however, he reaches greater and greater heights in spite of being wingless/perfectly flawless.[35]
54.  And 55.  His moon-like face is an abode of Amithabha/lustrous beyond measure; pair of eyes provides refuge to the compassionate goddess Tara/possesses unhurried pupils; voice is accompanied by Manjughosha/pleasantly sonorous; and retinue manifests the graceful exploits of Shrighana/enjoys rich pleasures. In this way, though he exhibits a personality that is in agreement with the Buddhist way/mirrored in good behaviour, his friendships, with whomsoever, are never seen to engender momentariness.[36] 
56.  Born next was his younger brother - known in the three worlds as Alankara (meaning “ornament”) because of his qualities/strings that travel/swing to and fro without a break on the path of scholarship, sanctified by the dust of Sarasvati’s feet.
57.  The authors of none of these three – the aphorisms, the gloss, or the desired statements – could even take a look at his treatise on (grammatical) rules. He thus established, all by himself, a (novel) system of grammar that was founded by four sages.[37] 
58.  The hum of bees alighting on the lotus that is Sarasvati’s abode continuously takes the form of the naturally sweet Poetry dancing in his mouth, words standing for footsteps.[38]
59.  How strange! His fame takes recourse to the Vedas/is compelling; complements the glory of Kumarila, Brahmin par excellence/brilliance of the moon; and employs many means of valid knowledge/boasts of enormousness though it behaves in the manner of a Charvaka/is spread far and wide in the world.[39] 
60.  Lady Speech is forever agitated in the mouths of the opponents who stand before him due, as if, to the contraction of her lotus-abode when the brilliant lustre of his moon-face falls upon it.[40] 
61.  His powerful Utterances put to shame the opponent’s Words by robbing them of all their wealth – their expressiveness. Wherefore, the latter instantly drown in the deep pool of silence.[41] 
62.  King Sussala appointed him even to the most prestigious office of a foreign minister - concerned with matters of war and peace - on his own accord. And Alankara too made his fame a pretext to end the silence of scholars/unveil the faces of gods.[42]
63.  Mankha, his (Alankara’s) younger brother, was born next. While he (Mankha) was still a kid, the dust from the feet of his teachers that he bore on his head acquired the potency of a magical powder to attract Sarasvati.[43]
64.  Mankha became the one and only home of Goddess Fortune since he was known for the loftiness of his thresholds/personality; exemplified the grandeur of mansions/righteousness; and dismissed the glory of all other courtyards (or ‘possessed several magnificent courtyards without’)/avoided waiting (for favour) in the many courtyards of others (or ‘did not covet others’ wives’).[44]
65.  As if overcome by special affection, Sarasvati kissed him, her son, with her many mouths (i.e., languages). For, he simultaneously acquired great erudition in the arts, the technical disciplines, and the codes of conduct.[45]
66.  Furious at the state’s delinquent elements, the revered king Jayasimha, son of his Excellency Sussala, reverentially appointed him – who was not very different (from Alankara) - as the chief judge in charge of protecting the subjects. 
67.  Though worn out with old age, their father (i.e., Vishvavarta) seemed to have attained extraordinary youth once more by sipping the ambrosial elixir of their abundant fame with his ears.
68.  Wishing to very quickly visit heaven, he (i.e., Vishvavarta) did indeed develop a fondness for Airavata, lord of elephants/cherished renewed devotion unto Ranasvamin (Vishnu), whose form is taken recourse to by many a pearl/liberated soul and who exudes copious ichor/is known for his enmity towards several danavas.[46]
69.  And so, at an opportune time sanctified by the blessed night of Shiva, Vishvavarta – his bodily vigour somewhat enfeebled – entered a state in which serene Sleep became his consort as he reclined on a bed of sacred Kusha grass befitting the holy site (of Ranasvamin).[47]
70.  On the glorious night of Shiva and in the spot holy to Vishnu, he playfully discarded the mortal knot and assumed a divine form characterized by the repeated recoiling of the slackened fancy bracelets – the serpents – adorning the right half startled at the sight of Garuda, king of birds, perched on the banner borne by the left half.[48]
71.  When their father quickly attained the state of the Supreme Brahman in the manner described above, the painfully sharp nail of sorrow got lodged in them. However, growing stronger by the day, Wisdom – their one and only best and most selfless friend – slowly and silently pulled it out from the wall of their heart.
72.  Once, on an Ekadashi night, Mankha, the youngest of them all, was resting alone, bound by religious vow, on the terrace of his mansion. The moon’s orb, reflected on his cheek, appeared like a sole swan for the Goddess of speech, residing in his mouth, to ride upon.[49]
73.  And there, he saw his father in a dream. The lustre of Tamala leaves intersected with that of Ketaka flowers in the two halves that constituted his divine body. With one half, he released the Ganga from the tip of his foot and with the other half, he bore that river – her waves roaring loudly – on the slope of his matted crest.[50]
74.  Having blessed his son - who, by now, had recognized him – from a distance with glances following one another like waves in an unbroken succession, he bathed him in the moonlight of his well-set teeth as he thus poured out an ambrosia (of words) for the ears to feast upon. 
75.  “Dear son! Haven’t you cultivated an erudition that seeks a share in the royal status of the rich (floral) ear ornaments adorning the multitude of pundits/gods? Why, then, do you not sanctify the Goddess of speech by acquainting her with the praise of the Moon-crested Lord?”[51]  
76.  Having thus manifested a pearl chaplet of pretty words to decorate his son’s ears, he swiftly disappeared along with the moon that was greatly exhausted after traversing the celestial path. 
77.  Thereafter, just as the Sun-God/bright Lord was getting ready to paint the world gold/entertain the world with the rays/words emanating from him – rays/words that were keen to oust the anguish of the lotuses, endowed with filaments/meritorious scholars – he (i.e., Mankhaka) opened his eyes and let his glances fall for a long time in the direction from which Vishvavarta had (recently) disappeared and experienced longing, sadness, and thrilling surprise, all at once.
78.  And thus, Mankhaka - his heart a companion of devotion that keeps growing, thanks to the nurturing care provided by his father’s Utterance – makes speech the handmaid of Shiva’s heroic exploit and commences to compose this poetic work.[52]
________________
[1]The wooden bolts must be understood as vertically placed if the comparison of sacrificial posts with them must make sense 
[2]The vanquished person circumambulates the vanquisher, who is stronger than him, out of respect. One of the synonyms of ocean is ‘ratnākara’ (‘mine of gems’); the milky ocean, in particular, produced various gems when it was churned.
[3]The three sacred fires are Dakṣiṇāgni, Āhavanīya, and Gārhapatya. A contradiction is brought about by describing the smoke as wiping off dust (JR) since both smoke and dust blacken and pollute the skin.  
[4]Śanaiḥ (gently) = anākalitam (without their knowledge) (JR).
[5]An alternative translation of a part of the verse is that (Maiden) Earth decorates the foreheads of the womenfolk in the three worlds with the saffron produced in Kashmira (JR). Saffron is native to Kashmira, wherefore one of its names in Sanskrit is Kāśmīraja. Women decorate their foreheads with it as a mark of their marital status. 
[6]The suggestion is that Vitasta is holier than the celestial river Ganga (JR). 
[7]Austerity refers to practicing celibacy and the like. Adopting an austere life-style is an important part of rejuvenation therapy with elixirs (JR). ‘Elixirs are useless in the case of those who do not practice austerities, etc.’ (‘tapaḥprabhṛtivirahe rasāyanasyāphalatvamāha’, Chakrapani on Carakasaṃhitā, 6.1.3.8)  
[8]The lake is called Ullola. The wish-granting Dohada ritual in this case is to make lotuses bloom on the hood. The Kaliya serpent goes by the name of Mahapadma (‘Marked by glorious lotuses’) on account of the lotuses blooming on his hood. That the lake is as vast as the ocean is suggested by the description of clouds sucking water from it (JR).  
[9]There is an apparent contrast in describing dust as an enabler of vision (JR)  
[10]The idols of Shiva include Vijayeshwara and others (JR). The butter does not melt even during the northern solstice which is a period of increasing heat. 
[11]Vishnu abandons the Milky Ocean which is inferior to Kashmira in its grandeur (JR). Kashmira, because of its prosperity, is the perpetual abode of Lakshmi, where she also manifests as the river Vishoka. The idea of using magic/magic powder to charm others is used quite a few times by Mankha (see also 3.63, 13.1, 19.2, 21.29) 
[12]Kadru’s progeny are the serpents (Nagas), whose enemy is Garuda, king of birds. According to the Nīlamata, Vishnu granted protection from Garuda to the Nagas at Kashmira (verse 71). 
[13]JR connects the idea in this verse to the previous one. Since Martanda is ever alert in destroying the darkness (also, spiritual) of the people of Kashmir, Kapateshwara can relax by taking a nap under water.
[14]Bali’s abode is the netherworld to which he was dispatched by Vishnu in his Dwarf incarnation.
[15]There can be no slush in the absence of rain (JR). 
[16]The eddies resemble hoofmarks by their shape.
[17]Golden strings are woven into crowns.  
[18]The heroic boasts are about defeating even self-controlled sages with those glances (JR).
[19]On a funny note, Mankha employs śleṣa (pun) in this very verse, even as he praises the city’s poets for steering clear of it.
[20]Mahasarit is the river Sindhu. Mankha employs a rare synonym, ‘garmut’, for creeper (‘garmut strī svarṇalatayoḥ’, medinīkośa, tāntavarga, 108)
[21]The purport is that the faces of women in Pravarapura surpass the moon in beauty (JR). 
[22]In ancient India, persons who were to be executed wore red garments. The wind, described in this verse, is such a strong stimulant of love that women cannot hold onto their love anger when it blows around the city.
[23]The idea is this: The buzz of the bees that are attracted to the blue lilies adorning the ears of the maidens appears like a song in praise of their elongated eyes, which, because they arouse passion, revive Kama and put an end to the sorrow of Rati, his widowed wife (JR).
[24]JR explains ‘hasantikā’ as ‘aṅgāraśakaṭikā’ (‘a small cart containing glowing coal’), which, by providing warmth to lovers during winters, acts as a stimulant of their love. It is a small, portable furnace with holes that is filled with burning coal. Mankha refers to it once again in 6.15 and 22.43. JR describes it there as ‘consisting of lattices’ (‘jālayuktā’), ‘made of iron’ (‘śastramayī’), and ‘endowed with fire within’ (‘magnāgni’).
[25]The Nandana garden is graced by the Parijatha tree, flourishes in the heaven, and is full of leaves. The Nandana in this verse is qualified as strange because it possesses the opposite features. 
[26]The Crystal Mountain is an epitome of whiteness.
[27]Since the gift of cows is a Dharmic act, it can counter Kali’s evil presence (JR). The horns are compared to goads because of their curvedness. 
[28]The application of medicated salve to the eyes can correct double vision (JR).
[29]The purport is that he was free of pride in spite of being wealthy, etc. One cannot lift one’s head if there is no space above to lift (JR). 
[30]This is a set of five verses forming one unit. A set of more than four connected verses goes by the name of Kulaka (‘kalāpakaṃ caturbhiśca tadūrdhvaṃ kulakaṃ matam’, Sāhityadarpaṇa, 6.287). These verses all describe the various shapes assumed by the coils of incense smoke; swarms of bees, locks of hair, serpents, poison, beard, musk mark, night, and clouds are all black in colour. 
[31]Truth stands for Shiva and eloquence for Parvati, wherefore the androgynous nature of his countenance (JR).
[32]An island is kissed by waves on both sides. 
[33]A collection of four connected verses, called ‘Cakkalaka’, a term used mostly by writers from Kashmira as an alternative to Kalāpaka. According to JR, when one encounters a black cobra on one’s path while starting on a journey, one does not return back. Marriages are accompanied by dancing. Both angry glance and valour are, by poetic convention, red in colour which is why the poet fancies the former as the latter. JR explains that it is a tradition in Kashmira to tie a garland around someone’s neck while appointing him to an office.
[34]An instance of apparent contradiction effected through pun. 
[35]A couple of connected verses, referred to as ‘Yugma’. The first verse and the first half of the second verse in this set use pun to bring about a simile between Bhringa and a bee whereas the second half of the second verse presents an apparent contradiction, again through pun – the word ‘apakṣati’ can be read as ‘a-pakṣati’ (wingless) and ‘apa-kṣati’ (perfectly flawless) 
[36]Another Yugma. Similar to the one above, this pair of verses initially describes, through the use of pun, how Bhringa’s personality is in agreement with the Buddhist way but ends with an apparent contradiction, effected by pun, which brings out a difference in his personality that is not in keeping with the Buddhist tenet. Amitabha, Tara, Manjughosha, and Shrighana all belong to the Buddhist pantheon. Buddhism propounds the theory of momentariness according to which what exists is a series of individual knowledge moments. Bhringa’s friendships are long-lasting, not momentary. 
[37]The tradition of Sanskrit grammar is known for its triad of masters, Panini, Katyayana, and Patanjali (‘trimuni vyākaraṇam’). According to Mankha, Alankara was such a great grammarian that he heralded a new tradition of grammar comprising a quartet of masters (‘caturmuni vyākaraṇam’). ‘Iṣṭi’ is a word used by Patanjali with respect to statements that help us arrive at the correct forms of words.  
[38]The purport of the verse is this: Assuming that his face/mouth is a lotus, Goddess Sarasvati resides there and the poetry that emanates from his mouth is not in fact poetry but the hum of bees swarming around that lotus-face (JR).
[39]Another instance where a similarity is first established between two objects of description (here, between Alankara’s fame and a follower of the Vedas) that is (apparently) contradicted in the end by the clever use of pun. The materialistic Charvakas, who do not believe in the Vedas, and the followers of the Vedas (and Mimamsakas such as Kumarila) are mutually opposed to one another.  
[40]The purport is that his opponents cannot open their mouths before him (JR). The moon causes lotuses to contract.
[41]When one suffers humiliation due to the confiscation of one’s wealth by those in authority, one drowns in water out of shame (JR).
[42]A difficult verse because of its multi-layered pun. JR explains ‘lekha’ as ‘scholar’ (‘paṇḍita’) and ‘god’ (‘deva’). Whereas the latter meaning is well-known, the former is not. The idea in this verse is that Alankara was such a mine of merits, the scholars ended their silence (which had resulted from not finding a praiseworthy subject) to praise him. Mankha describes this in an indirect way by attributing to Alankara’s fame the credit for ending the silence of scholars. Also, according to JR, the royal officials had sealed the door of temples with mud, fearing destruction of the idols of gods by enemies, but with Alankara having exterminated them, the doors of temples were reopened and the faces of idols were unveiled. A third pun seems possible, though not discussed by JR, when we examine the inter-related words ‘lipi’ (‘writing’), ‘lekha’ (‘document’), and ‘vimudra’ (‘without a seal’). The meaning, in this case, would be ‘He broke the seals of documents (which had not yet been opened) and (by issuing them,) wrote his own fame (as it were) on them’. The purport of this statement is this: Royal documents, ordering officials to carry out activities for the benefit of people, had been kept sealed. Alankara broke their seals and issued them, thus earning fame, so it appeared as if the documents themselves, through the letters written on them, were proclaiming his fame.
[43]The purport is that Mankha learnt all the Shastras through the grace of his teachers even while he was young. If he had learnt on his own, situations could arise in which there would be no consensus on the meaning of what he had written since it couldn’t be substantiated by tradition (JR).  
[44]A home too can exhibit a lofty threshold, exemplify the grandeur of mansions, and possess a grand courtyard. 
[45]‘Many mouths’ refers to the hexad of languages, namely, Sanskrit, Prakrt, Shuraseni, Magadhi, Paishaci, and the local vernacular, Kashmiri in this case (‘saṃskṛtaṃ prākṛtaṃ caiva śūrasenī tadudbhavā | tato’pi māgadhī prāgvatpaiśācī deśajeti yat ॥’, JR under 25.34). The arts include Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra, etc., the technical disciplines are logic, grammar, etc., and the codes of conduct are those that are dealt by the Smṛti texts (JR).
[46]Ranasvamin is the presiding deity of Pravarapura. ‘Na vāraṇasvāmini bhaktirudyayau’ does not mean ‘He did not develop a fondness for Airavata’ but, through intonation (kāku), the exact opposite, i.e., ‘He indeed developed a fondness for Airavata’ (JR). Pearls, by poetic convention, are found in the temples of elephants.
 
[47]The blessed night of Shiva is the auspicious night called ‘Shiva Ratri’. One reclines on the bed with one’s consort.
[48]Due to the holiness of the place, he attained the Harihara form, in which Shiva occupies the right half and Vishnu, the left. The poet indirectly describes this form by alluding to the fearful recoiling of the serpents adorning the Shiva half at the sight of Garuda, their enemy, perched atop the banner held by the Vishnu half (JR).
[49]One keeps a vow (of fasting, worship, keeping awake at night, and abstinence from sex) on Ekadashi. According to JR, the moon’s reflection suggests that he was in the freshness of his youth during this incident, whereby his beard had just started to sprout and his cheeks were still smooth. The word ‘ekākī’ (‘alone’) suggests that he had been married by now but was sleeping alone in keeping with the rules of the Ekadashi vow. From this and the 76th verse, it can also be assumed that he had been keeping awake the whole night (again in keeping with the vow) and the dream described in the next verse occurred at dawn (and, therefore, true).
[50]The Tamala leaves are dark and the Ketaka flower has bright petals. The dark half of the body is occupied by Vishnu and the bright half, by Shiva. The river Ganga originates from the foot of Vishnu and is bound in the matted locks of Shiva. 
[51]According to JR, the phrase ‘dvairājyakāri sumanonivahasya karṇapūśriyaḥ’ (‘a duplication of the gods’ ear adornment’) is an indication that Vishwavarta has attained a divine status – because only by becoming one among gods can he comment that the poem is a duplication of their ear adornment. This phrase can also be read as ‘karṇapūśriyaḥ sumanonivahasya dvairājyakāri’ (‘vying for the status of the flowers that adorn the ears’) though JR has not commented on this pun. This pun would give another layer of meaning – that connoisseurs adorn their ears with Mankha’s poem just as they do with flowers such as blue lilies.
[52]This indicates that Mankha proceeded to write his poem on his father’s command and not because of intellectual pride (JR). 


#========
Canto04


1. There exists on the face of this earth, a mountain named Kailasa - the abode of the bull-bannered Shiva. Spreading forth its lustre, which is as white as the moon, it is verily the laughter of the Direction beloved to Kubera, lord of wealth.[1]
2. Due to the deer herds reflected on its bright, crystalline slopes, it seems to have been eagerly fashioned by the Creator with heaps of (deer-marked) moons.[2]
3. Its pointed, sky-scrapping rays take on the appearance of (white) fibres sticking out from the base of the lotus that forms Brahma’s seat.[3] 
4. Because of his association with the rays streaming forth from this mountain, the Moon does not miss the joy of residing amidst the Milky Ocean’s waves even when he is on Shiva’s crest. 
5. Thanks to its rays that playfully dance around on all sides, the Mountain looks as if he were painting camphor designs on the faces of the Directions.[4] 
6. Encompassing the horizons with its foothills: rays, the white-hued (mountain): white-rayed moon presents a personality that never ceases to bear the earth’s burden: emits copious amounts of fresh ambrosia.[5] 
7. Besmeared by this mountain’s rays, even a monsoonal cloud - sucked clear of its blackish tinge – takes on the appearance of an autumnal cloud.[6]
8. & 9. Endowed with a form that is cavernous: accompanied by the war-god Kumara and exhibits peaks aplenty: serpent lords in the role of armlets, forever pervading the heaven: wielding the Pinaka bow, distinguished by foothills: feet that are frequented by the Ganas, and possessing a frame that boasts of white summits/ body that showered grace on the devotee named Shveta, the mountain seems to have been turned by Shiva, delighted by the service rendered unto him, into his look-alike.[7] 
10.  Surrounding Kailasa is a halo of rays emanating from crystalline rocks – as if river Ganga were circumambulating (the mountain) out of respect.[8]
11.  Because of the lustre issuing forth from the fire in Shiva’s eye, Kailasa transforms into a ruby-red structure as if to conquer Mount Rohana.[9] 
12.  Night therein becomes day and day becomes night, thanks to the gleam of crystals and the dark lustre of Shiva’s throat.
13.  Earth-bearing Mountains: kings have an emperor par excellence in this Mountain – showering fame, disguised as his moonlight-like lustre, in all the directions.[10]
14.  The stars that appear night after night in the firmament are indeed tiny particles of dust raised by Shiva when he treads on this mountain’s surface.
15.  This Lord of the rocky lineage instantly begets thousands of Merus - golden peaks – through heaps of gold that owe their origin to the hooves of Nandi, Shiva’s mount.[11] 
16.  Here, the fire in Shiva’s eyes is reflected on numerous crystal-studded summits and creates the spectacle of raging forest fires.[12] 
17.  Kailasa never forsakes its bond with waterfalls –waterfalls that appear like streams issuing from moonstones liquefied in large numbers by the moon on Shiva’s crest. 
18.  Fearing the lion, Parvati’s mount, or perhaps out of humility towards Shiva, the Wind abandons his vehicle, the swift deer, and serves this mountain in all gentleness.[13]
19.  The host of Kinnara women that Kailasa guards in his caves appears like the treasury of bodiless Kama – a treasury which he entrusted to the Mountain during the fire calamity.[14]
20.  It is an Indra among mountains. Rightly so, for it manifests a thousand eyes through its white, crystalline caves with pendulous circles of dark clouds in their middle.[15] 
21.  Hugged tightly by Goddess Parvati, Lord Shiva enjoyed a moment’s swing play when Ravana juggled this mountain in his arms.[16]   
22.  The moon-crested Shiva is no match for Kailasa – so lofty, the moon rolls about night after night on its foothills.[17] 
23.  Fanning its broad wings of radiance in all directions, this mountain stands by the Manasa Lake like a sportive swan of universe’s Lady Glory.[18]
24.  It looks splendid with crystalline slopes that, marked here and there by clinging bits of freshly dark clouds, appear like panegyric scrolls singing its praise.[19] 
25.  The sun’s myriad reflections, looking like sparks, make this mountain seem like a heap of ash left behind when Shiva completely burnt down all sins.[20] 
26.  & 27. Rising high beyond the Manasa lake: the mind’s reach; possessed of lofty ridges: formidable as well as fascinating; filled with beautiful valleys: pleasure-giving; home to the aggregate of all objects – those that have been proved to exist as well as those whose existence is yet to be proved: divine beings – Siddhas, Sadhyas, and Ganas; made beautiful by Devadaru pines: supporting the city of Alaka within; and distinguished by the presence of Shiva: peacocks, Kailasa resembles its own self. Oddly though, (only) animals other than lions: Yakshas, all throughout the day, resort to it.[21]  
28.  Covered here and there in armour-like masses of fresh clouds, it uncovers grounds that challenge the pride of Anjanadri – Collyrium Mountain.[22]      
29.  & 30. A boundary line that demarcates the earth from the heavens; a silken veil to the Direction-maidens; a fine piece of cloth over the faces of elephants that guard the directions; a second application of sacred ash over Shiva’s body; an abundance of froth springing forth from Manasa’s waters; and the slough of the serpentess that is earth – thus does the billowing white lustre of Mount Kailasa appear. 
31.  Within its crystalline self, this mountain holds the reflected universe – a universe that it devoured, perhaps due to Shiva’s training, at the end of an eon.[23]
32.  Sporting the reflection of the sun on its white surface, it looks splendid like Earth’s ear-ornament, fashioned from a thick cluster of Ira flowers.[24]
33.  Kumara’s peacock, mirrored on its crystalline rocks, looks like it is all set to draw out serpents from the depths of their Patala abode. 
34.  With its rays, akin to threads, stretching in all directions, it seems to stitch a garment for its master, Shiva, whose body is the universe and who exists in a state of stark nakedness.
35.  Joyous on account of being touched by the Blessed Lord’s feet, the mountain seems to shed tears by way of the water droplets dripping from its moonstones that melt continuously, thanks to their close proximity to the moon (on Shiva’s crest). 
36.  During the day, this mountain exhibits, or so it seems, an eye of fire - gifted to it by Shiva – in the form of a lofty, blazing cave of sunstones.[25]
37.  to 42. Keeping endless heaps of flowers ready by way of trees growing on either sides; honouring with showers of pearls snapping forth from the claws of Parvati’s lion; displaying the smoke of ritualistic incense through masses of fresh clouds; lighting rows of lamps by means of sunstones burning fiercely on the top of peaks; endlessly taking bath in waters gushing forth here and there from ever-melting moonstones; donning tilaka marks in the guise of cascades carrying reddish ore; singing praises with its numerous mouths – caves resonating with the roar of winds; making auspicious offerings of myriad fruits; commencing a musical performance on its slopes through the agency of divine bards; and radiating a white, smile-like lustre reminiscent of sacred ash from every part of its being, Kailasa remains motionless, deeply engaged as it were in worshipping the Lord of gods always present in its vicinity.[26]  
43.  Its face reddened by mineral ore, the mountain appears, even now, to be angry at Ravana for having committed the sin of lifting it in disdain.[27]  
44.  Unsettling due to the fire emitted by its sunstones and soothing because of the liquid streaming forth from its moonstones, it stands for the anger and grace of Shiva – Scorcher of the bodiless Kama – come together in one form.[28]
45.  It favours Malaya by granting its likeness to that mountain. For, like it, Malaya has for its company trunks of sandalwood trees: Shiva - alleviating all heat: sorrow and encircled by serpents.[29]
46.  On its peaks, sanctified even during the day by the deer-bannered Moon who remains ever vigilant on Shiva’s crest, the Herbs never learn the way of wayfarers’ lovelorn wives.[30]
47.  Atop its row of peaks, fresh clouds – friends of peacocks - that snatch from bees their dark hue, take on the appearance of thick soot gathering over the fiery glow of burning herbs.[31]
48.  Because of the moon’s multiple reflections on its peaks night after night, Kailasa appears majestic, wearing, as it were, Shiva’s skull garlands in thousands – garlands that he, its master, pleased by the mountain’s ability to bear his weight, bestowed on it.[32]
49.  On the crystalline surface of its slopes, the sun’s reflections look splendid like deposits of gold springing up wherever Nandi, Shiva’s mount, places his steps while grazing. 
50.  It is here that the breeze from Kubera’s pleasure grove originates. Kama exhibits the angry knitting of his eyebrows by disguising it as a swarm of wild bees that attends upon this fragrant breeze. To Parvati, the fine-browed damsel of the god who wears the infant moon, this breeze marks an intermission in her lessons on the art of feigning love-anger.[33]
51.  The resounding roar of clouds on this mountain masks even the energetic trumpet of Ganesha momentarily; it readily breaks the silence of the peacock that is Kumara’s vehicle; and it is esteemed even by Shiva as a liberal bestower of happiness because it allows him to enjoy a quick embrace from his lady.[34] 
52.  In the precincts of Kailasa is the lake known as Manasa that boasts of a state preceding the very notion of impurity (i.e., an extremely pure state), provides succour to flocks of swans escaping the monsoon’s unending perils, and wears matted locks as it were through series of waves bouncing on its bank. Reflected in this lake, the mountain appears like the Serpent Lord surfacing up to view the world of mortals.[35] 
53.  The mountain’s lustre is a moonlight that does not differentiate between day and night. Spreading across the heavenly path, it commences to disastrously obliterate all colours other than its own.[36] 
54.  Its bright form, an object of Shiva’s liking, resembles the fair goddess Parvati for, akin to her, it is the source of multitudinous tall, ever-growing Vibhitaka trees: hails from the highly esteemed family of Daksha, has the ability to pervade the sky: to ride a lion, and is of an auspicious nature famed for emitting a lustrous and attractive effulgence: for giving birth to Kumara, Taraka’s destroyer.[37] 
55.  Its appearance is strange as well as adorable because it has teeth in the region of buttocks: gravel on its sides, curly hair on its foot: the city of Alaka in its foothills, an appropriate waistband around expansive breasts: slopes fit for clouds to roll around, and wavy wrinkles behind the mouth: fickle monkeys on its top.[38]
56.  On its slopes, trees appear like yogis engaged in steadfast penance. Their crowns are adorned with dangling human skulls in the form of fruits; undulating swarms of bees look like Rudraksha rosaries held in their leafy hands; they have prop roots for matted hair; and even when there is an unrestricted movement of winds: of vital airs, they check the rise of dust: the guṇa of rajas.[39]
57.  Where the Lotus Grove’s bashful budding never ceases and the female Chakora birds are seen to perpetually fast, even there – in the vicinity of the serpent lord’s nether city – there is some momentary flash of light, thanks to the pencil of rays emitted by the crystalline boulders in this mountain’s base.[40] 
58.  In its purity, Kailasa resembles the heart of virtuous men. A huge, splendidly dark Tamala tree reflected on this mountain appears like a billowing mass of darkness that was sucked in by its moonlight-like lustre and is now contained within its belly. 
59.  The wind that tirelessly blows across the slopes of this mountain carries droplets of ichor gushing forth in streams from the temples of Ganesha; has for its ally the fragrance of the pollen dust of lotuses blooming on the Heavenly River’s lap; and is waited upon by a swarm of bees that has scant regard for the celestial Mandara flowers.[41] 
60.  By way of its many unlocked mansions, the city of Alaka seems to be closely gazing at Kailasa – Creator anew of wonders unique in the three worlds – with a multitude of unblinking eyes.[42]
61.  On this mountain’s slopes, the imprint of juicy red lac from the feet of flirtatiously frolicking Vidyadhara maidens appears like Lady Twilight shining forever in the vicinity of the sun and moon – natives inhabiting the path of Shiva’s gaze - so she may render service to them.[43]  
62.  Springing high beyond the firmament with its form, Kailasa, like a paramour, holds the Directions in a tight, playful embrace. It displaces the universe’s vault further up. And the lustre of its base fills the nether world. Methinks Meru, Indra’s hill, stands no chance of gaining anything by foolishly competing with this mountain.[44]
63.  Splendid is Kailasa – a Milky Ocean in the sky; a Snowy Mountain that sunlight cannot melt; and an undescending stream of the Celestial River that is forever suspended in the sky. Spewing its moonlight-like lustre in every direction, it tricks the female Chakora birds into futile acts of licking. 
64.  The lustre of this king among mountains is a duplication of moonlight, the assonance of Shiva’s boisterous laughter, a tautology of the ambrosial drops that are Parvati’s soft smiles, and a reiteration of the Heavenly River’s waves. Who is capable of recounting every great quality of this mountain, the brilliance of whose lustre keeps growing?[45] 


________________
[1]The regent (Dikpāla)of the northern quarter is Kubera. The various Directions are personified as the wives of the respective regents. JR notes that Mankha’s use of the synonym ‘Dhanapati’ (‘Lord of wealth’) for Kubera is significant because it is the wives of rich men who have occasions to smile and laugh. 
[2]The deer described here are the musk deer. JR fancies what the Creator’s eager thoughts might have been – “The universe looks so beautiful because of the one moon I created; How much more must it if I create a heap of such moons!”
[3]The rays emanate from its mine of (crystalline) gems. They are straight because the gems, being inaccessible, have not been disturbed; also, they reach as far as the world of Brahma and appear like lotus fibres which are also white and straight (JR).
[4]Not only do the rays radiate upwards but also on all the sides. Since the Directions are personified as women (due to the word, ‘kakubh’ used for ‘direction’ being in the feminine gender), it is appropriate for them to be described as adorned with camphor designs (JR). The ‘faces’ of the Directions refers to their surface.
[5]The word ‘navasudhabharam’ must be split and read as two words ‘na vasudhābharam’ in the case of Kailasa and as a single compound ‘nava-sudhā-bharam’ in the case of the moon (JR). The moon and its rays are believed to contain ambrosia.
[6]Kailasa’s rays reach as far as the path of clouds (JR). Autumnal clouds are white. 
[7]The Ganas or Pramathas are Shiva’s attendants. According to the Liṅga Purāṇa, the Brahmin sage Shveta was saved from the clutches of Yama by the grace of Shiva (‘śvetenāpi gatenāsyaṃ mṛtyormunivareṇa tu | mahādevaprasādena jito mṛtyuḥ’, 1.30.37). Mankha refers to Shveta also in verse 5.9, commenting on which JR describes him as a Rājarṣi (‘royal sage’).
[8]Both Kailasa and Ganga epitomize whiteness. JR explains that Ganga, having been conquered by Kailasa through the latter’s superior whiteness, respectfully circumambulates her conqueror.
[9]The Rohana is a gem-studded mountain. Generally speaking, poets describe gems as red-coloured (‘sāmānyopādāne ratnānāṃ śoṇataiva’, Kāvyānuśāsana, under 1.10), wherefore the Rohana mountain, though possessed of various gems, is qualified as studded with rubies.
[10]According to poetic convention, fame is white in colour.  
[11]It is believed that the hooves of Nandi produce gold (JR). Mankha refers to this again in 4.49, 5.33, and 5.50. 
[12]JR explains ‘ratnasānuṣu’ as ‘sphaṭikasānuṣu’ probably because a crystal surface reflects better.  
[13]The deer is the Wind god’s vehicle, wherefore one of his names is ‘mṛgavāhana’. 
[14]The Kinnaras and their consorts are semi-divine beings with the face of a horse (‘aśvamukhyaḥ kinnarastriyaḥ’, Mallinatha on Kumārasambhava, 1.11). The ‘fire calamity’ is a reference to Kama being burnt down by Shiva. JR explains – ‘one who is going through a calamity hands over one’s precious belongings to a trusted person for safekeeping’.
[15]Indra has a thousand eyes, the outcome of a curse by sage Gautama. The word ‘vṛṣā’ (‘bull’, ‘Indra’) at the end of a compound indicates the best of a class. Therefore, ‘śailavṛṣā’ also means ‘the best among mountains’ apart from ‘Indra among mountains’. The black clouds in the background of crystal-white caves give the appearance of eyes.
[16]Ravana attempted to uproot Kailasa when his aerial chariot was stopped from proceeding further by the divine power of Shiva who was sporting on it (evamuktvā tato rāma bhujānvikṣipya parvate | tolayāmāsa taṃ śailaṃ sa śailaḥ samakampata || cālanātparvatasyaiva gaṇā devasya kampitā | cacāla pārvatī cāpi tadāśliṣṭā maheśvaram ||, Ramayana, 7.16.27,28)
[17]Whereas the moon adorns Shiva’s head, it goes around the foothills of Kailasa, thus indicating the latter’s loftiness (JR). 
[18]Kailasa as well as a swan are white. The Manasa lake is an abode of swans.
[19]The clouds stand for characters in the scrolls (darkened using soot) (JR).
[20]Like embers covered with ash (JR).
[21]Sukhadā must be split as su-khadā and sukha-dā; sālakāntasthitiḥ as sāla-kānta-sthitiḥ and sa-alaka-antaḥ-sthitiḥ; and aharyakṣaiḥ as a-haryakṣaiḥ and ahar-yakṣaiḥ two different ways. The comparison of Kailasa with its own self is to suggest an absence of anything else to compare it with (JR). JR glosses ‘khadā’, a rare word, as ‘droṇī’ (‘valley’). There is an apparent contradiction in the second half of the 27th verse, indicated through the use of the word ‘citram’ (‘It is odd!’). The oddness is because there is no specific reason why lions must be excluded from the list of animals (a-haryakṣaiḥ) whose home is Mt. Kailasa. To solve this contradiction, one must read the other meaning of aharyakṣaiḥ by splitting it as ahar-yakṣaiḥ, i.e., ‘by Yakshas, throughout the day’. 
[22]The slopes of Kailasa that are covered by dark clouds appear like the black Collyrium Mountain. One who challenges one’s enemy gets ready to face him by wearing an armour (JR). 
[23]Shiva devours the universe at the end of an eon. According to JR, it is also suggested that the entire universe is situated at the very base of Kailasa since the object that is reflected cannot be situated far away from the reflecting surface. 
[24]The flower ‘Irāmañjarī’, said to be a heavenly nymph cursed to attain that form by Indra (Nīlamata 693-695), is identified by its Kashmiri names ‘Virkum’, ‘Virkin’, ‘Virkim’, and ‘Yurukum’, described by Grierson as ‘a certain sweet-smelling yellow flower appearing in early spring on the joints of the hollow stems of a certain creeping plant before the leaves have sprouted’ (A Dictionary of the Kashmīrī Language, p. 1440). 
[25]Sunstones emit fire when sunrays fall on them. According to JR, the caves are so vast the sun’s rays enter them. 
[26]A kulaka set of six verses that describe how Kailasa worships Shiva in the manner of a devotee.
[27]An angry face is flushed red. 
[28]In the case of Kama, Shiva first exhibited his anger by burning him down and then his grace by reviving him. 
[29]Being himself the king of Mountains, Kailasa can show favour on other Mountains. 
[30]The Moon is regarded as the husband of Herbs. Due to his constant presence on Kailasa, the Herbs on its summit never experience separation from him as a wayfarer’s wife would from her husband (JR) 
[31]The luminous herbs can be thought of as lamps and the clouds above them as soot collected on the sky’s surface. 
[32]The moon, because of its white hue and round shape, resembles a human skull. The multiple reflections give the appearance of a garland of skulls. 
[33]The idea in ‘mānānadhyanāṣṭamī’ (literally ‘the eighth day in a half-month, a day when Parvati takes a break from her study of feigned anger’) is that when the breeze from Kubera’s garden, a stimulant of love, blows, Parvati can no longer maintain her feigned anger towards Shiva. Students take a break from studies on the eighth day of the half-month (JR).
[34]The roar of clouds alarms Parvati, wherefore she suddenly embraces Shiva for protection. 
[35]The white mountain with its numerous peaks appears like the white Serpent Lord with numerous hoods. 
[36]According to JR, there is also a suggestion that the mountain obliterates the difference between the various Varṇas starting with Brahmins.
[37]Vibhītaka is large tree whose nuts were used for making dice. Kumara killed the Asura Taraka.
[38]The strangeness is due to the presence of teeth on the buttocks, etc., whereas the adorability is due to the features of the mountain that are suggested by the alternate meaning of the words used to indicate strangeness.
[39]Even when the trees in Kailasa shake in the winds, they do not raise up dust because the mountain on which they grow is crystalline. A second meaning of ‘antaṃ nayanto rajaḥ’ is that the trees ‘produce the perfectly mature nectar’. A difference between these trees (identified with Yogis) and actual Yogis is that the latter need to control their (vital) winds in order to rein the quality of rajas whereas the former can check the rise of rajas (dust) even in strong winds (JR)
[40]By ‘Lotus Grove’s bashful budding never ceases’ and ‘female Chakora birds perpetually fast’, what is meant is that neither the light of the sun nor the moon enters the netherworld since the lotuses bloom with sunlight and the Chakora birds feast on moonlight. Since Kailasa’s light reaches even the netherworld where neither sunlight nor moonlight can reach, it is suggested that the former is superior to the latter two (JR).  
[41]The exalted nature of the wind blowing across Kailasa is suggested through the three ways in which Mankha has described it. Mandāra is one among the five celestial trees, the others being Pārijāta, Santāna(ka), Kalpavṛkṣa, and Haricandana (pañcaite devataravo mandāraḥ pārijātakaḥ | santānaḥ kalpavṛkṣaśca puṃsi vā haricandanam || Amarakośa, 1.53).
[42]The unlocked doors are akin to unblinking eyes. One gazes at a wonderful object with unblinking eyes (JR). 
[43]The sun, moon, and fire are spoken of as the three eyes of Shiva. It is appropriate that Lady Twilight serves the sun and the moon with whom she is closely associated. 
[44]The verse describes Mt. Kailasa as all-encompassing – as pervading the directions in the middle and extending above and below till the heavens and the nether regions respectively.
[45]To be noted in this verse is how everything that the lustre of Kailasa is compared with – the moonlight (radiating from the moon tucked in Shiva’s locks), the boisterous laughter and soft smiles of Shiva and Parvati respectively (both of whom reside on Kailasa), and the waves of the Heavenly River (which is bound in Shiva’s matted hair) – is found on Kailasa itself, thus lending greater propriety to the use of words such as ‘dvirbhāva’ (‘duplication’), ‘anuprāsa’ (‘assonance’), ‘paunaruktya’ (‘tautology’), and ‘vīpsā’ (‘reiteration’). 


#========
Canto05


1. On that mountain resides Shiva himself, whose adornment is the tender cool-rayed moon. Bestowing favour on the world is his pastime. Bumblebees clinging to the chaplet of Parijata flowers tucked in Indra’s hair conduct a lute concert at his feet.[1]
2. In this world, the oblique scar that forms on the forehead – vehemently rubbed against Shiva’s footstool – of each and every person looks like a caret mark that has been inserted therein (i.e., on the forehead) due to the Lord’s desire for adding a fresh set of blessed and auspicious letters that are beyond Fate’s grasp.[2]  
3. His head kissing the ground, Vishnu devotedly bends down before Shiva. While doing so, he strews flowers as it were at the Lord’s feet by way of his Vanamala garland and seems to make a ritual offering of lamps through lightning streaks emanating from his tresses that are the clouds.[3] 
4. And Brahma too, disappointed that he has completely exhausted the bounty of each and every floral kind during his worship but still gripped by deep devotional fervour, wishes, without a doubt, to venerate Shiva even with the lotus that is his home. 
5. When, to exterminate the Tripuras, Shiva made Mt. Mandara his bow, the Serpent Lord’s elongated frame – akin to a frozen waterfall of that mountain – became the bowstring. And the flames emanating from Mandara’s forest fires – masquerading as the fiery feathers of the flaming arrow strung to that bow – blazed forth without a break.[4]  
6. In the fire of his eye – a fire that was sprinkled all around with droplets of water from the Crest River, made tumultuous by the violent shaking of his head in anger; a fire in whose boundary was spread a bed of Kusa grass, namely, eyelashes upturned in a frown – Shiva offered Kama as the ritualistic oblation.[5]  
7. In causing endless streams of tears to run through the faces of Tripura’s doe-eyed maidens, Shiva filled them (the faces) up as it were with the cascading waters of the mountain that was raised by him to the status of a bow.[6]   
8. When the fire in Shiva’s eye – thirsty due to an unprecedented surge of excessive anger - gulped down Kama’s body, the very mention of drinking parties in which sweet wine is sipped from lips ceased to exist for Rati.[7]  
9. Shiva bears in his eye an insufferable fire - (red) dawn to the moon that is the face of Kama’s wife;  an avowed bestower of freedom from fear to Shveta; and the apocalyptic fire’s dance master.[8]
10. When Shiva dances his robust Tandava dance in the evening, the swinging hem of the lordly tusker’s hide that is his garment agitates the Divine River (on his crest) and becomes strewn with a dense cluster of her droplets, appearing to still carry as it were pearls in its frontal globes.[9]
11. Desirous as it were to behold all the eight forms of Shiva at the same time, Brahma – the sage whose hermitage is a lotus – expands all his eight eyes while facing the Lord to pay him respect day after day.[10]  
12. The threefold universe is a dish that Brahma, the cook, prepares with great care and after spending a lot of time. And then, Vishnu, the head chef, preserves it. But Shiva alone, and with great ease, gobbles it up completely every time the festivity of final dissolution takes place.[11] 
13. Shiva is a strange elephant among/the mysterious lord of gods. For, he has the frontal globe on his trunk/holds a pot(of nectar) in his hand; the fastening rope is tied to his head/(Ganga’s) water flows in his crown; pearls find their place in his feet/liberated beings take recourse to his feet; his mate is not a she-elephant/Parvati is his wife; and elephants, their faces swollen in musth (or oozing ichor), occupy his every limb/serpents, their mouths made terrible by the potency of poison, cover his every limb.[12]
14. How could the Elephant Asura stand a chance against Shiva? His pestle-like tusk broke asunder due to the light beaming from the crest-moon; his streaming ichor was sucked dry by the dazzling flame of the fire emanating from the eye; and the wind from the flapping of his ears was quaffed up by the ornamental serpents.[13]   
15. The Elephant Asura became extremely anxious by merely letting his glance fall on Shiva’s ornamental serpents that resembled iron chains, sliver crest-moon that appeared like a goad, and one of his strong arms that assumed the likeness of a tying post.
16. The one and only physician of the triple worlds, Shiva grasped a sturdy sword/surgical probe and employed it on the Asura Andhaka/blind demon, who was rambling around in the battlefield, and cured him of a difficult-to-treat blindness, namely, his pride, so he could get a complete vision of fear’s essential nature.[14] 
17. When the officiating priests scurried away, Sacrifice was left in a lurch. And Shiva, unfavourably disposed towards it because of his anger, deprived it of its life. But Daksha still managed to finish the final ritual ablution in the vast lake of tears manifesting that very moment due to his sadness.[15] 
18. When Shiva’s foot, lifted high up in the revelry of dance, forges a bridge across the sea that is the sky, the stars mimic a closely packed cluster of sweat beads sprouting on account of traversing the long distance.   
19. The lotus-born Brahma takes leave of him (i.e., Shiva) and wanders on the banks of Lake Manasa, exhausted by endlessly searching among the many flocks of swans roosting there his own chariot’s swans that had flown away the very instant they chanced upon the clouds on the tresses of Vishnu seated close by (i.e., close to Brahma).[16]  
20. Shiva – one half of whose body is Parvati – has his other half reddened by the lustre of the gems which the serpent-lords, his armlets, carry (on their hoods). It therefore appears as if he has been jealously taken possession of by Lady Twilight - his eternal sweetheart – on that side too. 
21. How strange, Shiva relieved his angry/inflamed eye – reddish in hue due to the fire within/like fire – of its malefic change/aliment by subjecting Kama to Death’s passionate play/cleaning in water using cotton wicks and making his pretty-browed wife shed tears aplenty![17]
22. Shiva is Vishnu, though possessed of a unusually different nature (than the actual Vishnu)/the foremost among men, known for his wonderful ways:  He bears the Lord of birds/moon on his person; he assumes the ninth, non-Buddha, incarnation/is draped in a majestic elephant-hide; the Serpent Lord rests on him; and his hand is dreadful and doesn’t carry a club/always adorned with fearsome armlets (i.e., serpents).[18]
23. It embraced the Sky, eagerly kissed the faces of the Directions, and made marks on Lady Crescent with flame tips/nails after engulfing the firmament/seizing the garment: Was there anything which Shiva’s youthful Ocular Fire did not do after Kama/love entered it?[19] 
24. He wears on his crest Brahma’s skull – thickly enveloped by billowing coils of dark smoke emanating from the Serpent-Lord’s breaths as if, on account of still carrying a small vestige of the lotus seat’s sweet scent, it were being licked by swarms of bees.[20]
25. He is Sthāṇu/a bare tree trunk. Known widely for his odd-eyed nature/growing firmly on uneven roots, he/it possesses a vehicle/single leaf that can reach as far as the universe, has the sun and moon for his eyes/presents a floral feast to the eyes and carries an axe to cleave miseries apart.[21] 
26. The continually expanding rays of the moon on his crest are akin to jasmine buds in their brightness. And the lotus-hands of the approaching celestials become cupped in his presence due as it were to the power of those rays.[22]
27. A stream of rays emanating from the gems on the hoods of the snakes residing in Shiva’s matted locks passes through the hollow cavities in the human skull (which he wears on his crest) making it appear like yet another fiery eye, though this one is not on the forehead.[23] 
28. He respectfully bears on his head loyal Lady Crescent – whose hand has never been taken in marriage by anyone/light has never been obscured by any other (celestial) object; on whom Rahu’s bite marks find no place; and whom Little Rabbit has never ever sullied with a kiss.[24]
29. Shiva made the Asura who assumed the form of an elephant the butt of a shower of pride-shattering arrows/disagreeable to swarms of bees due to the drying up of his ichor, perhaps because he could not bear to see the Asura forcibly snatch away the beauty of Ganapati’s face and the graceful gait of Devi.[25]
30. The Moon, separated from the graceful Mark that he cherished in his heart, rests on the slope of Shiva’s matted crest – cooled by the incredible waves of the Divine Stream. Assuming an ashen hue, he never abandons his emaciated look.[26]
31. Desirous, as it were, of putting an end to his semblance with the Tripura maidens, he took away the Kumkum mark/fire from their foreheads, rid them of the bracelets encircling their arms/armlets of encircling serpents, and deprived their bodies of all auspicious marks/Parvati.[27]
32. Profuse sweat rained from Shiva’s forehead when he was enraged at Arjuna in his hunter’s disguise. And afraid, as it were, of being suddenly put out by the sweat, the fire within the Lord’s third eye vanished out of sight.[28]
33. By merely meandering in a leisurely manner, Shiva’s bull fills up the world with surplus gold, thus surpassing its master who, with much difficulty, managed to rain down gold just for one week.[29]
34. to 36) In the prison of his throat, furnished with iron fetters in the form of black cobras worn as garlands, Shiva held the ocean-born Poison captive. This fickle Poison, notorious for troubling the three worlds, blocked the path of vision of the heavenly maidens’ eyes – akin to blue lotuses – as if it were the smoke emitted by the submarine fire when the latter was forcefully stirred up in the frenzy of the on-going churning activity. It looked like some longstanding darkness that, fearful of being pulverized by the Churning Mountain’s rotations, was making a hasty escape from the nether world. And it stole the beauty of the bumblebees swarming before Shri’s abode - a lotus bloom – as soon as she emerged (from the ocean’s depths).[30]
37. The chest of Shiva – become one with Vishnu in form - exhibits an extraordinary loftiness – loftiness that allows the Kalakuta poison to enjoy a mutually respectful relationship with the Kaustubha gem, its sibling.[31] 
38. When Shiva prostrates at the feet of Parvati, the face of the lion that is her vehicle is reflected in the Celestial River on his head. And it seems he is eagerly imitating the Man-lion form so he can subdue Vishnu’s pompous pride.[32] 
39. As Shiva bends down repeatedly before Parvati, her face downcast in unrelenting anger, she paints a fresh black mark on the crescent moon over his crown with her kohl-stained tears and also enables Ganga, who also dwells there, to enjoy an unprecedented bond of friendship with Yamuna.[33] 
40. Shiva, the foremost among those that know the great path/Mahanaya philosophy first destroyed the body of Kama and then mercifully endowed him with a perfect form, thus turning the acts of creation and dissolution on their heads.[34]
41. Contracting his body, the Moon – robber of Parvati’s facial charm – waits on Shiva’s head to quickly catch as it were a crocodile floating in the Celestial River adorning the Lord’s crest for Kama, his friend, to fashion a new banner with it.[35] 
42. Since Shiva, in his mighty fury, taught the Sun god a lesson by inflicting severe punishment on him, the latter is declared even to this day by those well-versed in sacrificial rites as partaking the offering of Purodasha.[36]
43. to 45) The sun – whose rays are inimical towards all white lilies; the moon – who befriends the faces of doe-eyed maidens by becoming their standard of comparison; the fire – which laps up oblations, offered during sacrifices to the accompaniment of powerful hymns; the wind – which trades in the scent of freshly blooming flowers; the earth – an expansive parasol of Shesha, the serpent; water – which a weary peacock seeks from the cloud; the self – which assumes (in its role as the sacrificer) a body emaciated by the performance of obligatory rites; and space – free royal roadway for all celestial objects to move around: Though Shiva exists in unison with the three worlds through these many transformations of his divine body, the scriptures declare him – enjoying a state that knows no birth, decay, and death – as not possessing eight forms/the one with an indestructible form.[37]  
46. When Shiva manifested as a pillar of fire – a Linga – Brahma and Vishnu, each desirous of ascertaining its limits, travelled upwards and downwards respectively; the former attained the state of its (i.e., the fiery pillar’s) spark and the latter put on the appearance of its downward-facing smoke.[38] 
47. Shiva seizes learned men by their necks/makes the army of gods go through humiliation/binds the Celestial River and the crescent moon together. Thanks to him, an elderly poet/ Brahma experienced loss of face. He pampers only his own body with materialistic comforts/the stretched-out coils of serpents. And strangely, in spite of all this, he is still the unparalleled object of reverential service due to the richness of his great qualities.[39] 
48. Kama exhibited a quick expertise in handling his five arrows as if they were the five divisions of a play; he displayed robustness of action/agitation; and zealously presented the Aṅgahāra movements, all of which unfolded in a gradual sequence/was perturbed by the loss, occurring one after the other, of all his limbs. In this manner, having put up the play titled “My destruction”, he entered behind the screen, namely, the thick sheet of flames emanating from Shiva’s eye, and finally disappeared.[40]
49. Rows of undulating flames emitted by the fire within Shiva’s frontal eye take on the appearance of saffron-hued victory flags celebrating its (i.e., the fire’s) brave exploits such as the burning down of Yama and Kama.[41]
50. May Shiva – the free appropriation of whose left half by Parvati is a festive event in which Maiden Earth flaunts her rich jewellery of interspersed gold and pearls, produced when their (i.e., Shiva’s and Parvati’s) individual mounts (i.e., the bull and the lion), which are also united, place their front hooves on the ground – fill the worlds with joy and amazement alike.[42] 
51. As he commences to dance, Shiva – his physical frame stirred into action on all sides –  forcefully shakes off a mass of ashen dust from each and every limb, along with the roaring waters of the river on his crest, as if (he were scattering a mixture of ash and water all around) after quickly expelling the Miseries, which had been plaguing the triple worlds, to the farthest horizons.[43] 
52. It was Shiva because of whom the Sun God bid farewell to his teeth, Brahma became poorer by one head, Vishnu – he that sucks life away from the Asuras – pulled out his (very own) eye, and Kama had to do away even with his whole body. In spite of all this, is there any place in the universe where he does not figure as the principal organ of perfect success?[44]  
53. Itself tawny/a mongoose, the matted hair of Shiva – a source of surprise to the minds of those inhabiting the three worlds – is a close companion of the fire/peacock that resides in the third eye and is always favourably disposed towards the moon/physician, lord of herbs. It is (however) a place in which serpents repose complete trust.[45] 
54. Shiva put an end to the dualism between his and Parvati’s body. Through the oneness that was thus established, he bestowed the supreme honour of his grace on the God of love. The glances of the celestial doe-eyed damsels revelled without restraint on this unified form of Shiva and Parvati – filled with the never-ending wine of beauty. 
55. Shiva possesses a body whose one half is besieged by Parvati – the very personification of Kama’s regal power – and where the gem on the hood of the Serpent Lord – writhing over the (right) chest - mirrors the left breast, manifesting, as it were, another breast on the right side too.[46] 
56. Fabricating his (wondrous) form through the amalgamation of the male and the female (halves), Shiva eternally relieves the eyes of each and every being from the task of blinking. In this form, one half of the Moon on the (right) crest is overlapped by the dark glow of the sapphires adorning the tiara on the left side and it seems even he has assumed the half-man, half-woman form along with Night, his beloved.[47] 
57. Shiva – who has fashioned a single body out of two along with Parvati -  expounds the splendid secrets of the dancing art every twilight hour. And as he does so, the fatigued ornamental serpents on the right half expand their hoods and collectively feast on the fragrant breaths emanating from the mouth of his exhausted left half (i.e., Parvati).[48]
________________
[1]Indra bows down before Shiva, whereby his chaplet touches the latter’s feet. The hum of the bees is likened to the sweet music of the lute.
[2]The ‘kākapada’ refers to a mark that resembles a crow’s foot and is used to insert missed letter/s. Fate’s letters are said to be inscribed on one’s forehead.
[3]Vishnu, in his devotional fervour, cannot suffer a delay in offering worship to Shiva, which he surely would if he would go in search of externally available paraphernalia. So he offers worship with what is part and parcel of his physical form and therefore readily available (JR).
[4]The Serpent Lord is compared to a frozen waterfall on account of his white frame. Feathers are attached to arrows. JR explains the compound ‘śarāgnipuṅkha’ in two ways: (1) The forest fires on Mt. Mandara appear like the feathers attached to the fire that is Shiva’s arrow and (2) The forest fires appear like the red (lac-dyed) feathers attached to Shiva’s arrow. The second explanation is interesting because it informs us that the feathers attached to arrows were dyed with lac. The suggestion is that Mt. Mandara’s very features transformed into those of the bow it became in Shiva’s hand.
[5]While making a ritual offering to the sacred fire, one sprinkles water all around it and spreads the holy Kuśa grass nearby (JR).
[6]The streams of tears on the faces of the Asura womenfolk appeared like the cascades of Mt. Mandara which Shiva employed as his bow.
[7]Made a widow by Shiva’s third eye, Rati could no longer dream of kissing Kama 
[8]By burning down Kama, the fire of Shiva’s third eye dampened the glow of Ratu’s moon-like face. The moon becomes dim at dawn
[9]According to poetic convention, one of the places where pearls are found is the elephant’s frontal globe. The droplets of Ganga’s water appear like pearls
[10]One of the names of Shiva is ‘Aṣṭamūrti’ (‘Eight-formed’), referring to the eight forms through which his presence is imminent in the universe, namely, the five elements, the sun, the moon, and the conscious being (often identified with the person who performs the Vedic sacrifice). Mankha describes these forms in verses 5.43-5.45 and alludes to them also in 16.5
[11]Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva create, preserve, and annihilate the universe respectively. Mankha suggests that Shiva is all-powerful – in the same way that a master enjoys what has been prepared by a cook and preserved by a head chef. 
[12]An elephant whose frontal globes are found on the trunk, fastening rope is tied to the head (and not the foot), etc. is indeed strange. 
[13]A Sanskrit poetic convention, rarely used elsewhere, but employed with some frequency by Mankha is about the elephant’s tusk bursting open in moonlight (see also 10.53, 17.13). The purport of this and the next verse is that the Elephant Asura lost to Shiva even before he could fight with him (JR). Serpents are said to subsist on air.
[14]One gains vision after being treated for one’s blindness by a physician. Andhaka was blinded by pride and knew no fear. The eye disease ‘paṭala’ is otherwise known as ‘liṅganāśa’, āndhya, or nīlikā. Surgery is sometimes indicated in its treatment (liṅganāśe nīlikā paṭalamāndhyamiti paryāyāḥ; atha --- niṣkampaṃ gṛhītayā śalākayā --- vidhyet; Aṣṭāṅgasaṅgraha, Uttarasthāna, 17.2, 17.7)
[15]The destruction of Sacrifice, personified as a deer, is narrated in the Vāmana Purāṇa (Chapter 5) – ‘When the fire was put out, Sacrifice assumed the form of a celestial deer and ran helter-skelter in the sky along with his wife Dakshina’ (‘agnau praṇaṣṭe yajño’pi bhūtvā divyavapurmṛgaḥ | dudrāva viklavagatirdakṣiṇāsahito’mbare’, 5.26) and Shiva killed it in anger with his arrow (‘trinetro yajñaṃ krodhānmārgaṇairājaghāna’, 5.43). The poetic idea in the verse is this – The sacrificer takes a ritual bath when the sacrifice ends. In this case, the sacrifice ended with the very death of personified Sacrifice and Daksha, the sacrificer, took a ritual bath in his very own tears of sorrow. 
[16]The series of events described here is as follows – Brahma approaches Shiva on his swan-drawn chariot to offer respects to the latter; the swans chance upon the clouds on the tresses of Vishnu, who, also having arrived there to offer respects to Shiva, is sitting close by; the swans (that, according to poetic convention, fly away to Lake Manasa during the rainy season), unable to bear the sight of clouds on Vishnu’s tresses, fly away; knowing that his swans must have flown to Lake Manasa, Brahma reaches there; since the bank of Lake Manasa is already populated by so many flocks of swans, Brahma is left endlessly searching for his own swans.
[17]The strangeness is due to the fact that Shiva treats his inflamed eye through procedures done on someone else, i.e., Kama and Rati (JR).
[18]Vishnu is borne by the Lord of birds, assumes the ninth incarnation of Buddha, rests on the Serpent Lord, and carries a club, called Kaumodakī, in his hand
[19]‘Entered’ (‘nimagnacara’) is used both in its literal and metaphorical senses here. In the latter sense, Mankha likens the fire to a love-struck youthful paramour who goes around embracing and kissing women. The Sanskrit words used for sky, directions, and crescent are all in the feminine gender so as to facilitate this idea. It is also possible to explain the compound ‘antarnimagnacarapuṣpaśara’ as ‘after Kama’s arrows entered its heart’.
[20]The ‘lotus seat’ here refers to Brahma’s seat. According to JR, Mankha employs the expression ‘gandhalavānuvṛtti’ (‘a small vestige of the sweet scent’) because Brahma’s skull can carry only a small bit of the lotus seat’s fragrance, given it (before Shiva lopped it off) was not in close contact (as compared with his limbs) with the flower.
[21]There is an apparent contradiction, effected by pun, in the description of a bare tree trunk that grows firmly on uneven roots, possess a single leaf that reaches as far as the universe, and presenting a floral feast to the eye, carries an axe. The contradiction is apparent because it can be solved by taking into consideration the alternate meaning of the verse as applicable to Shiva. The use of the word ‘netra’ in the sense of ‘root’ is rare. Shiva wields an axe, wherefore he is known as ‘Khaṇḍaparaśu’ (‘Wielder of the split axe’).
[22]The gods fold their lotus-like hands before Shiva in respect. This folding of hands is described by Mankha as the closing of lotuses resulting from the rays of the Lord’s crest-moon falling on them.   
[23]The blazing skull appears like a fourth eye of fire (JR).  
[24]The demon Rahu is believed to swallow the moon during an eclipse. The black mark on the moon is likened in the Sanskrit language to a deer or a rabbit.
[25] The gait of beautiful women is often compared to the gait of elephants. 
[26]The crescent moon on Shiva’s matted locks is not marked by a black spot. Mankha compares this moon to a lover who has been separated from his beloved, who, in this case, is the black spot (in the feminine gender). And since lovelorn individuals allay the heat of their separation by resting in cool places, the moon too rests on the slope of Shiva’s matted crest that is cooled by the waves of Ganga. Lovers in separation are also characterized by paleness and an emaciated look – features shared by the thin sliver of the moon on Shiva’s crest (JR).
[27]The poet uses the device of pun to establish a semblance between Shiva and the Asura maidens and describes the Lord as ending this semblance by destroying the Asuras and making their wives widows who, therefore, could no longer decorate themselves with Kumkum, bracelets, or other marks of auspiciousness.
[28]Shiva, in his hunter’s disguise, did not reveal the third eye so as to hide his real identity from Arjuna. Mankha provides a poetically imagined reason for the missing eye.  
[29]The purport is that Shiva makes his devotees greater than even himself (JR) 
[30]A set of three verses connected by a single descriptive theme is called ‘Tilaka’. The Poison is guilty of blocking path (of vision), escaping (from the nether world), stealing (the lustre of bumblebees), and causing trouble (to the three worlds), all valid reasons for its imprisonment.
[31]People (though possessing mutually dissimilar natures), can live in perfect harmony under someone who is lofty in character (JR). The Kalakuta poison and the Kaustubha gem are siblings since both were born from the ocean when it was being churned.
[32]Lovers are often described in Sanskrit poetry as prostrating before their beloveds to allay their love-anger. 
[33]Since Parvati’s face is downcast, her kohl-stained tears fall directly on the head of Shiva, prostrating at her feet. These black tears accomplish two things: They fabricate a hitherto unseen black mark on Shiva’s crest moon and mingle like the dark waters of Yamuna with the Ganga on his locks. 
[34]Annihilation/withdrawal precedes creation in the Mahanaya system (JR). Mahanaya is a synonym of the Krama school of Shaiva Tantra. Commenting on this very use of the term Mahanaya by Mankha, Rastogi (1979, Vol 1, p.2) observes that “the Krama system ardently adheres to the cyclical notion of Reality” which can allow for the act of withdrawal to precede that of creation.
[35]Mankha picturises the moon as a thief waiting to catch a crocodile floating in river Ganga. The diminutive form of the crescent moon resembles the contracted body of the thief just as he gets ready to grab the crocodile (JR). The use of ‘caura’ (‘thief’) in the last line gives room for extending the metaphor of thief to the entire verse. One who robs one thing (here, Parvati’s facial charm) can also rob something else (here, a crocodile). Kama’s banner is marked by the aquatic creature ‘makara’, often identified with the crocodile.
[36]According to a Puranic legend, Shiva, in his anger, broke the teeth of Surya/Pushan when the latter laughed at him in the sacrificial hall of Daksha (pūṣṇo hyapātayaddantān - - - yo’hasaddarśayandataḥ; Bhagavata Purana, 4.5.21) and since then, the latter partakes of (easy-to-chew) cakes made of rice flour in Vedic sacrifices. (puroḍāśa/piṣṭacaru) (JR). 
[37]A Tilaka set of 3 verses, alluding to the eight forms of Shiva and ending in an apparent contradiction, made possible through the description of Shiva as ‘Aṣṭamūrti’ and ‘an-aṣṭamūrti/a-naṣṭamūrti’. Mankha frequently employs the philosophically loaded word ‘sāmarasya’ in order to suggest a harmonious blending/unison – see also 8.32, 12.48, 14.28, 14.53, 14.57, 15.29, 15.33, and 20.38. 
[38]Since spark and smoke do not reach very far (away from fire), there is a suggestion that neither Brahma nor Vishnu could find out the limits of the Linga (JR). Brahma and Vishnu are compared to spark and smoke respectively because of their bodily hue.
[39]An apparent contradiction is presented between the first three lines of the verse which, through pun, describe certain negative qualities in Shiva, and the last line, which describes him as possessing good qualities in abundance and therefore worthy of reverence.
[40]The five divisions (Sandhis) of a play’s plot are named Mukha, Pratimukha, Garbha, Avamarśa, and Nirvahaṇa. The five arrows of Kama are the flowers Aravinda, Aśoka, Cūta, Navamallikā, and Nīlotpala. JR refers to an alternate list of the five arrows, namely, Unmādana, Tāpana, Śoṣaṇa, Stambhana, and Sammohana. Aṅgahāra is a technical term for a specific class of dance movements. The Nāṭyaśāstra (chapter 4) describes 32 such movements, starting with Sthirahasta. The basic element constituting an Aṅgahāra is called Karaṇa, which involves the combined movements of the hand and the feet. JR, therefore, glosses ‘Aṅgahāra’ as a special type of Karaṇa (‘karaṇaviśeṣa’).
[41]The exploit of burning down Yama relates to the story of Shveta (see footnote under 4.9). Though, according to Liṅga Purāṇa, Yama was deprived of his life merely by looking at Shiva (‘sasarja jīvitaṃ kṣaṇādbhavaṃ nirīkṣya vai bhayāt’, 1.30.21), the Haracaritacintāmaṇi of Jayadratha mentions that Shiva burnt him down with the fire of his eye (jāgrataṃ pāśahastaṃ ca nigirantamivāntakam | śvetānukampī netrāgnijvālayā sañjahāra yaḥ ||, 1.17).
[42]The idea here is as follows: When Shiva and Parvati unite with one another, their mounts, the bull and the lion, also undergo a physical union. It is believed that Shiva’s bull can unearth gold wherever it places its foot on the ground. Likewise, it is believed that there are pearls found in the frontal globes of elephants which can adhere to the blood-soaked feet of a lion when it pounces on them. Therefore, when the united bull-lion mount places its feet on the ground, gold and pearls fill the earth alternatively. According to JR, since the poet likens the union of Shiva and Partvati to a festival, there is poetic propriety in describing Maiden Earth as being richly adorned during this occasion. The poet’s benediction is also marked by propriety since the sight of gold and pearls can elicit joy and the sight of a being that is partly bull and partly lion can cause amazement.
[43]A mixture of ash and water is scattered all around to prevent the re-entry of a criminal who has been expelled from his kingdom (JR).
[44]Though different gods lost their organs and even the entire body on account of Shiva, it is surprising that he is the chief organ of success (i.e., every successful activity in the universe is on account of him). According to the Śiva Purāṇa, Vishnu offered one of his eyes to Shiva in the place of a lotus that went missing during his worship (parīkṣārthaṃ viṣṇubhaktestadā vai śaṅkareṇa ha | kamalānāṃ sahasrāttu hṛtamekaṃ ca nīrajam ||, 4.34.20; tadaprāpya viśuddhātmā netramekamudāharat ||, 4.34.22)
[45]It is a contradiction to describe a mongoose that is the close ally of a peacock and a physician as providing shelter to snakes since all the three, namely, mongoose, peacock, and physician (a toxicologist, in this context) are dangerous to the latter (JR). The contradiction is only apparent and must be resolved through the device of pun. 
[46]The left breast, reflected on the serpent’s gem, appears like its right-side counterpart (JR).  
[47]A roundabout way of saying that all beings behold the wondrous form of Shiva with unblinking eyes (JR). Servants often adopt the practices of their masters, so it is befitting that the Moon too should assume the half-man half-woman form in the manner of Shiva, his master. Verse 19 from the Ardhanārīśvara Stotra, ascribed to Kalhana, plays around with the same idea, though what is reflected here in the Moon is Parvati’s dark mane (premṇārdhaṃ vapuṣo vilokya militaṃ devyā samaṃ svāmino maulau yasya niśāpatirnagasutāveṇīniśāmāśritaḥ । āste svāmyanuvartanārthamiva tat kṛtvā vapuḥ khaṇḍitaṃ deyādadvayabhāvanāṃ sa bhagavān devo’rdha-nārīśvaraḥ ॥)
[48]Shiva dances every day at twilight, whereby he is also known as Sandhyānaṭa or Sandhyānāṭin. 


#========
Canto06


1. Then, once upon a time, the spring season – whose insignia are flowers – made a grand appearance. Swarms of honey bees ended their fast. The terrible curse of jealous anger was lifted off women. And Kama’s intoxicating pride got a boost.[1]
2. All heated up, the Sun – beloved friend of the Lotus Plant - broke up with Lady South who was eagerly looking forward to meet the youthful Breeze – companion of Mt. Malaya.[2]
3. Lotuses – servants waiting upon the faces of Kashmiri maidens – covered up lakes everywhere to quickly become, as it were, the seats of spring’s Fortune Goddess.
4. Spring alone is knowledgeable about the nitty-gritties in the regal polity of Kama – passion’s monarch. Other seasons are incapable of disentangling even one knotty little secret in Kama’s corpus.[3]
5. Spring seemed like he was desirous of composing a love poem: Palasha blossoms looked like his muttering lips, an undulating swarm of bees like his dancing brow, and steady, freshly bloomed lotuses like his fixed eyes.[4] 
6. Intent on allaying as it were the excessive heat caused by her long-term association with the hot-rayed sun, the Southern Direction developed a liking for the billowing breeze that was soaked in the fragrance of sandalwood.
7. The day gradually grew longer along with the lukewarm sighs of women in love anger. And the night got smaller along with the lovelorn person’s hope for survival.[5] 
8. In the presence of the spring season – a flesh-devouring lion, whose bloody claws are the red Palasha flowers – love anger, like a terrified elephant, ran far away from women, freeing itself from iron shackles disguised as lines of kohl-stained tears (shed by them).[6] 
9. The courteous Southern Direction was (until now) incapable of forsaking the Sun. And he too was always soft-rayed/quite happy in her association. God knows whose malicious talk caused a drift between the two.[7] 
10. Those very cuckoos (literally ‘reared by others’) that spent their winter within groves as singularly deaf and dumb creatures transformed, strangely enough, into highly learned pundits in the court of Spring – king among seasons.[8]  
11. Wayfarers feared the spring season because of its young mango trees that looked like Kama’s battalions: scattering pollen/dust; splendid due to thickly packed leaves/chariots; and pervading the directions with the call of cuckoos/frustrating hopes (of winning) by their terrifying war cries.[9]
12. No lovelorn people could tolerate the woods where the boisterously laughing Vasantika bloom advocated thoughtless aggression and koels prattled continuously even at odd hours.[10] 
13. When the Karnikara blossomed, the nose and the eye debated - "Poor in fragrance" declared the nose; "So colourful" praised the eye.[11]
14. Earlier, the sportive cuckoo in the pleasure grove couldn’t learn a thing even though it was taught by city-bred lasses. Presently (in the spring season), that very cuckoo transformed into an eloquent scholar.[12]
15. The tender Ashoka tree – latticed by flame-like bunches of flowers bursting forth intermittently – shone like a Hasantika (ember basket) used by Kama even after the winter season had ended.[13]
16. The cuckoo – bringing out the uniqueness in Kama, the graceful flapping of its wings serving the purpose of his weapon/through the easy validations of its thesis, thanks to the logical arguments put forward by him (i.e., Kama) - was a complete genius in quashing every youthful man’s self-righteous pride, born of dispassion/means of proof.[14]
17. The worlds were bathed in the pollen of Ashoka blossoms that looked like vermilion marks on the face of the elephant named Kama and that became the dawn’s crimson light in putting up a spirited fight against the pitch-black darkness of women’s’ love-pique.
18. The Ashoka, by way of donning the ochre robe, namely, its red canopy of thickly blossoming flowers, took the vow of a Buddhist mendicant to preach the doctrine of emptiness to lovelorn wayfarers, or so it seemed.[15]  
19. It seemed as if Kama – angry at lovelorn ladies (i.e., those who were separated from their lovers due to love-pique) – had cast his bloodshot glances on the Palasha flowers, shameless in robbing the parrot’s beak tip of its crimson glory .[16]
20. A line of letters engraved in Kama’s panegyric; a fistful of the deadliest poison’s seeds to the lovelorn; a sapphire necklace for adorning Creepers – thus did a swarm of bumblebees appear. 
21. The bees were undoubtedly the powdery filings that spilled down when spring’s saw trimmed the nights. Else, how could they blind the eyes of wayfarers’ wives?[17] 
22. Audaciously practising the art of poisoning Kama’s ear, the Bees robbed hundreds of flowers/deities of their nectar/treasury and tormented the wayfarers.[18]
23. By polishing the rays of the moon/making a gift of cows to the best of Brahmins, Spring, the king of seasons, made him soak the earth (in moonlight/milk) night after night and thus ended the dry spell in the eyes of the wayfarers’ wives.[19]  
24. It seemed Maiden Earth was teaching lovelorn ladies how to weep through the droplets of water dripping from melting snow and the cuckoo’s protracted cries.
25. A wing-flapping/favorably disposed swarm of bees, hovering wildly over a mango tree, its unconditional friend, seemed to have adapted its appearance for an incense-waving ritual (to secure the tree’s welfare).[20]
26. Was there anyone, whose confidence Spring – arrogant due to his recent appointment as the minister of Kama, sole conqueror of the world – did not shatter with his frequent frowns disguised as undulating swarms of bumblebees?[21] 
27. Adorned with flowers and resounding with the hum of bees, a tall Champaka tree in the pleasure grove looked like the raised foot, its anklet jingling, of Lady Spring as she danced merrily.[22] 
28. Bumblebees waited upon the Tilaka tree to whose fully mature blossoms they were welcome guests. Whereupon, the tree seemed to be dotted with dark kohl as doe-eyed ladies let their eyes fall on it during the Dohada ritual.
29. Youthful men began bedecking their pretty-eyed sweet hearts with freshly blossomed flowers, wherefore Kama successfully accomplished his mission of discharging (flowery) arrows even without employing a bow.
30. By kicking the Ashoka tree - armoury of the god with flowery arrows – the womenfolk stamped it as it were with a vermillion seal disguised as the sticky paste of red lac (applied to their foot).[23] 
31. That a proud lily-eyed damsel placed her foot, its anklet tinkling, on an Ashoka tree itself became a reason for the tree to secure a strong foothold at the very top of the plant species!
32. When lovelorn women lay down with eyes closed on plantain leaves, akin to beds made of the sacred Darbha grass, the male cuckoo, best among birds/Brahmins, recited their death chant.[24]
33. Was there anyone whose travel plan was not foiled by Spring, the tricky thug? However, the life-breaths of lovelorn individuals kept moving in and out of their throats.[25]
34. Nourished by the pouring of water, creepers grew luxuriantly but the creeper-like designs on the cheeks of ladies offended by their lovers were destroyed by flooding tears.[26] 
35. Emerging out of the cloud’s veiling curtain, the Moon stretched his rays/hands wide to open the gates of Death’s kingdom for the lovelorn.[27]
36. Pretty-browed women, seated beside their paramours, had taken a break from studying the ways of love anger. However, their eyes were busy training in the traditional knowledge of coquetry.[28] 
37. Pleasant wind; clear sky; agreeable water; lukewarm heat; and renewed earth – Ah! Such was the strong influence of spring, even the (five) elements underwent a transformation.[29]
38. Alas! That very dark-coloured/black-moneyed and honey-sucking/drunkard Bumblebee who used to visibly visit flowering/menstruating Creepers was appointed by Spring as the royal priest in Kama’s kingdom.[30]
39. The moon, its multitude of rays rinsed bright as it were by the flooding tears of the wayfarers’ wives, vied with the smiling faces of Murala maidens.[31]
40. The bee had a narrow profit-loss margin in the bygone season when the floral bounty was negligible. Given the current bonanza of (nectar-laden) filaments, was there any charm whatsoever which it (the bee) did not master?[32]
41. Everywhere, red Ashoka blossoms – blooming afresh, as if after enjoying a nap – heralded the dawning of Kama’s fiery valour. And the Fish-bannered One, unrelenting in his intense pride, regarded the worlds as no better than a blade of grass.[33] 
42. Greeted by the Breath of lovelorn women, the Southern Breeze - Mt. Malaya’s progeny and Kama’s principal bodyguard – received due reinforcement/honour.[34]
43. It seemed Spring had snatched away the sheen of gold from the paling cheeks of wayfarers’ wives to distribute it among fresh Champaka flowers.[35] 
44. By fostering bonds of intimacy (among couples) with the help of the southern/well-bred Winds, Kama – Lord of lovers – could gain an effortless victory over the entire world.[36] 
45. Tears were quick to form in the eyes of wayfarers’ wives during the spring season, in which swarms of dark bees appear like the smoke of Kama’s fire and the breeze that blows from mango trees is thickly laden with pollen.[37]
46. Forests – their leaves made to dance by the skilful tactics of the Chaitra breeze – seemed to threaten, as if in intolerance, even the sage’s mind that falsely prided itself as righteous.[38] 
47. No sooner did the creeper-maidens grasp the black flywhisks in the form of swinging bee swarms than the Emperor among music notes settled in the throat of young cuckoos to conduct his durbar.[39]
48. Gradually attaining the status of a poet par excellence in the ingenious re-creation of the three worlds, Spring brought forth a fragrant, golden-hued creation/charming, aptly worded canto through the Champaka clusters.[40]
49. The community of Bees – smeared limb after limb, as it were, with the (dark) lustre of Kama’s unsheathed sword – turned noisier by the minute, having gained privileged access to the mango’s sweet fragrance.[41]
50. Distributing his kingdom among the Southern Breeze, the Moon, the Male Cuckoo, and the like, the emperor of all seasons readily entrusted the world to the hero Kama for his enjoyment.[42] 
51. Bustling with bumblebees inside, a half-open Champaka blossom looked like a golden inkpot kept ready for inscribing Kama’s official order.[43]
52. A bee found accommodation in Kimshuka buds – saffron designs painted on Lady Spring – and nourished its life with the ample pollen stored therein.[44]
53. Attracted to its freshly blossoming flowers, bees swarmed a Kuravaka tree. And it seemed like the latter, hugged by women just then, was marked with the musk designs painted on the tip of their breasts. 
54. No sooner did he come into view than Spring – a Buddhist mendicant whose saffron robe is the mass of floral dust – caused a maiden’s Love anger that had stepped out of her heart’s house to undertake a journey of no return.[45] 
55. Drawing his wife close to his bosom, a male bee – bard to the glorious exploits of Kama – amused himself by diving in and out of the lake, namely, the mango’s floral cup.[46] 
56. It seemed like Kama, in the manner of the sage Vishvamitra, had created a second heaven halfway through the sky – a heaven populated by new Apsaras in the form of pretty ladies playing on swings.[47] 
57. Climbing onto swings, youthful women made a quick trip to the sky to carry out, as it were, an expedition to attack the moon, guilty of rebelling against the beauty of their faces. 
58. The King of musical notes, in his newfound glory, freed the minds of moon-faced maidens from the shackles of love anger and attained excellence in the throat of cuckoos through luxurious ablutions in dripping mango juice.[48]
59. Just as Kama was preparing to conquer the worlds, creepers - bent excessively under the burden of their blossoming flowers and ready to receive bees/arrows – put themselves to his service as bows.[49]
60. Puffed up because of his friendship with Kama, the Southern Breeze –amassing the rich fragrance of sandalwood, causing the hairs of Kerala women to stand on their ends, and composing the narratives of love – repeatedly exhibited his fickleness in each and every direction.[50]
61. The Ashoka trees – warriors of Kama, impatient to conquer the world – were covered in clusters of floral blooms that resembled wounds oozing blood from their mouths. And swarms of bees thronging densely around those clusters looked like black-coloured bandages.
62. There was not a sport the Winds from Karnata did not enjoy: the swinging coconuts were the balls they tossed about; undulating, tightly-packed swarms of bees were the (black) daggers with which they practised fighting in so many ways; and the pollen of Vasantika flowers was the sand they playfully scattered all around.[51] 
63. Characterized by a circle of bees hovering swiftly above, the heaving blossom of creepers appeared like Kama’s millstone for instantly pulverizing the love anger of pretty maidens.[52]  
64. A swarm of bees assumed the beauty of Spring’s long moustache – which he twirled proudly after quashing the love anger of all women. It resembled an iron chain shaken up by the elephant, namely, Kama as he broke loose from the binding post. And sadly, lovers in separation could not even look at it somehow without becoming perturbed. 
65. Raining burning coal on the wives of wayfarers and esteemed by the side glances of women who were languid beyond measure after lovemaking, the winds originating in the cave houses of the Sandalwood Mountain swelled with pride on account of their power to both punish and act kindly towards those smitten with love.
66. The approaching breeze from Mt. Malaya appeared like the long arm of Kama, extended forwards in all readiness to grasp his bow. And a thick swarm of fragrance-seeking bees put on the appearance of calluses that had formed there from pulling the bowstring.[53]
67. As the Southern Breeze – untimely death incarnate to the composure of sages and executor of orders passed by the Season whose insignia is the golden Ketaka – blew around, heralding the fragrance of Mt. Malaya's creepers, Kama’s arm itched terribly after a very long time.[54] 
68. The wind, fearful as it were of being ardently gobbled up by the serpents that are the head ornaments of Shiva, residing on Mt. Kailasa, refrained from paying a visit to the north. And then, on approaching the south, it was licked by the flicking tongues of numerous serpents hissing amidst sandalwood thickets and had to turn away startled even from there.[55] 
69. A circle of bees alighted on trees, in the vicinity of their white blossoms that each resembled a parasol, thus making manifest even in broad daylight the terrible evil omen of multiple lunar eclipses to the wives of wayfarers.[56]
70. In the court where Kama’s performance was being appraised, Spring presented a set of records that were inscribed on the broad petals/papers of Vichakila flowers with bumblebees standing for ink drops. Unsettling every embodied being/clerk, he carried on with the task of documenting profits and losses in the vital breaths of lovelorn individuals through his naughty ways/in a handwriting that was difficult to decipher.[57]  
71. Having performed sorcery on the Wintery Snow by making white Kunda blossoms wither in its stead, the Vernal Sunlight cast off the veil of clouds that (hitherto) surrounded it and attained (a new) robustness.[58]
72. Of these two - the multitude of jasmine petals that are adept in mimicking Kama’s fame and the buzzing swarm of bees that is the drum of departure for the life breaths of lovelorn women – (the sight of) the former became a terrible poison to the eyes of wayfarers’ wives and (the sound of) the latter a continuous shower of arrows to their ears.[59]
73. The Southern Breeze – trusted companion of Mt. Malaya’s trees and soul-mate of the fish-bannered Kama – wandered around enjoying the tight embraces of Tamraparni’s waters. During its frequent leisurely sojourns to Lanka, it sported in the city’s vicinity and flaunted its good fortune by imbibing the fragrance of the floral buds which the trees growing on the slopes of Mt. Trikuta had put forth.[60] 
74. Deprived of energy, Winter fell asleep on the earth - lush with fresh, tender grass. And Spring, calling out aloud by way of the bee’s buzz, took charge as watchman to guard Kama’s possessions.[61]   
________________
[1]‘Then’ implies ‘After Shiva settled down on Mt. Kailasa’ (JR). Some of the features which poets ascribe to the spring season and which Mankha alludes to in this and the following two canto are as follows: It is Kama’s ally and a season abounding in flowers and nectar; mango trees put forth fresh sprouts in spring; there is excitement among cuckoos and bees; the cuckoos feast on mango sprouts and sing the Pañcama (‘pa’) note; women enjoy playing swing sports; trees and creepers that bloom in this season are Aśoka (bears red flowers), Kiṃśuka/Palāśa (flame of the forest, bears red flowers that are curved like the beak of a parrot), Kuravaka (red amaranth), Karṇikāra (possesses flowers that are colourful but lack fragrance), Tilaka (bears fragrant flowers), Campaka (bears yellow flowers), Nālikera (coconut tree), Kanaka-ketaka (a variety of pandanus that bears fragrant, golden flowers; not to be confused with the Ketaka that has spiny leaves and puts forth flowers in the rainy season; Rajashekhara associates the Kanaka-ketaka with the summer season – ‘puṣpapradaḥ kāñcanaketakīnāṃ grīṣmaḥ’, kāvyamīmāṃsā, 18), Vāsantikā/Atimukta/Mādhavī (types of white jasmine), Pāṭalī/Pāṭalā (trumpet flower), Bakula (bears fragrant flowers), Sindhuvāra/Sinduvāra and Tagara (bear white flowers), Vicakila (a type of jasmine), and Karavīra (fragrant oleander); women perform Dohada rituals to trees before they flower, as for example, kicking the Aśoka with their bedecked foot, hugging the Kuravaka, honouring the Tilaka with their glances, and spitting mouthfuls of wine on the Bakula; the white Kunda/Jāti flowers wither in spring; the southern breeze bearing the fragrance of sandalwood blows from Mt. Malaya in the Karṇāṭa, Kerala, and Siṃhala provinces; women cannot sustain their love-anger for long in this season, when factors that excite passion (such as the song of koels and the southern breeze) are all around; separated lovers go through intense suffering, even to the extent of dying; the sun travels to the northern direction; days grow longer; and the winter’s mist clears off, allowing the sun and the moon to shine brightly.
[2]Though the contextual meaning pertains to certain happenings in the spring season, the non-contextual meaning that is gleaned from it is that of a lover (the sun) who breaks up with his girlfriend (the southern direction) in envy (scorching heat) on account of her fondness for another man (southern breeze) who is youthful and related to someone powerful (Mt. Malaya) (JR).
[3]The purport is that other seasons are not as conducive to love as spring is, thanks to its superior beauty (JR).
[4]Such is the range of behaviours exhibited by someone composing a poem (JR). 
[5]The sighs are an indication of sadness brought about by separation.  
[6]Palāśa also means ‘flesh-devouring’
[7]Dakṣiṇā is both ‘southern’ and ‘courteous’. The idea of a lover and his beloved is superimposed on the sun and the southern direction (JR)
[8]Cuckoos are silent during winter (udyānānāṃ mūkapuṃskokilatvaṃ --- hemante syāt, Kāvyamīmāṃsā, chapter 18). 
[9]One of the Sanskrit synonyms of cuckoo is ‘anyapuṣṭa’ which means ‘reared by others (i.e., crows)’. The deaf and dumb too are often forsaken by their families and therefore reared by others (JR).
[10]‘Aggression’ here means ‘massacre’ (of lovelorn people)
[11]Mankha is famed as ‘Karrṇikāra-Mankha’ on account of this verse. ‘Rora’ is a rare word that means ‘poor’/’wretched’
[12]The reading ‘purāṅganābhiḥ’ (‘city-bred lasses’) has been retained in the place of ‘varāṅganābhiḥ’ (‘pretty women’) because of its greater poetic beauty. Even clever, city-bred lasses, as contrasted with simple-minded, rustic women, could not teach a word to the cuckoo (JR).
[13]See footnote under 3.29. The Hasantikā is used to keep oneself warm in winter. 
[14]The pun in this verse is effected by the use of certain technical terms from Indian Nyāya logic. Pakṣa is defined as ‘One of the two alternate views about a topic of contention’ (‘vipratipattyekakoṭiḥ’, Gautama Nyāya Sūtra, Vṛtti1.41). An example of such a contested topic would be the eternality or otherwise of sound. If one of the pakṣa is ‘sound is eternal’, its opposite pakṣa – the pratipakṣa – would be ‘sound is non-eternal’. Pakṣa is also the minor term in a syllogism. For example, in the syllogism ‘The mountain is fiery, because of smoke’, the minor term is mountain. It is qualified by the major term, i.e., fire, which needs to be established (‘sisādhayiṣādharmaviśiṣṭo dharmī’, JR). Hetu is the advancement of proof by providing logical reasons (‘sādhanopanyāso hetuḥ’, JR). Māna is the means of knowledge, such as direct perception or inference, by employing which one can establish one’s view about a topic of contention. 
[15]The doctrine of emptiness maintains that the existence of external forms cannot be proved (‘anupapadyamāna-rūpatvam, JR). ‘Emptiness’ in the case of the lovelorn travellers stands for stupefaction brought about by not knowing what to do (‘kiṅkartavyatāmūḍhatvam’, JR). 
[16]Kings cast their angry glances on robbers (JR). Kama, the king, casts his angry glances on the Palasha flowers which rob the parrot’s beak of its red hue.
[17]The wives of wayfarers, because of their lovelornliness, are oblivious to what is happening before them and therefore akin to the blind. The poet fancies this blindness as resulting from a shower of powdery filings.
[18]The non-contextual meaning relates to wicked men who poison the king’s ear, loot temples, and torment those who follow the path of Dharma (JR).
[19]A king who drenches the earth with the milk of cows gifted to Brahmins protects his kingdom from drought. ‘Ending the dry spell in the eyes of wayfarers’ wives’ is a roundabout way of saying ‘making the wayfarers’ wives rain down tears’. The agent of the drenching action is the moon/Brahmin and the causal agent (hetukartṛ) spring, the king of seasons (JR).
[20]A roundabout way of saying that the swarm of bees appeared like the smoke of incense during the Ārati ritual. JR explains that the ritual is conducted to ward off spirits and other harmful beings and secure a loved one’s welfare.  
[21]Officials newly appointed to high positions are often arrogant (JR).  
[22]Lady Spring dances in the joy of conquering the world (JR).
[23]An armoury is stamped with vermilion mark (JR).
[24]Brahmin priests recite hymns from sacred texts by the side of the dying, who are made to lie on a bed of Darbha grass (JR). 
[25]Though lovers were wary of travelling in spring, the life breaths of lovelorn individuals were ready to depart. Mankha uses a rare word ‘ṭhaka’, related to the vernacular word ‘thaga’, and borrowed into English as ‘thug’. 
[26]Patravallī or patralatā are ornamental designs drawn on cheeks, breasts, etc., with saffron, musk, sandal paste etc. 
[27]The sight of the moon causes suffering to the lovelorn. 
[28]Though the women had taken a break from studying (the ways of love anger), their own eyes were busy learning coquettish behaviours, which is strange (JR). The purport of the verse is that the spring season evokes amorous behaviours in women and supresses their love anger. 
[29]If even the five elements were transformed on account of spring, it goes without saying that every being was affected by it (JR). 
[30]According to JR, the adjective ‘malīmasaśrīḥ’ (‘dark-coloured’) also indicates that the bee is young since animals lose their bodily complexion with age. He adds an interesting note on how adjectives can lend themselves to multiple meanings apart from their primary meaning. For example, the adjective ‘asiśyāmam’ (‘deep blue as a sword’) qualifying the sky suggests the extra meanings of a sky that is far away and free of clouds. The word ‘puṣpeṣu’ can also be taken as the locative plural form of puṣpa’ (flower). In that case, the meaning would be ‘The Bumblebee was appointed a chief officer in charge of flowers’ (i.e., in charge of overseeing the floral bounty).
[31]Murala is a province in South India and is often identified with Kerala. Though the complexion of the Murala women is dark (Rajashekhara cites them as examples of a deep dark complexion - ‘muralīgaṇḍamalinaḥ’, Kāvyamīmāṃsā, 17), the moon is akin to their smile-lit faces. JR notes that the word ‘sāpatnaka’, derived from ‘sapatnī’ (‘co-wife’) primarily refers to the rivalry between women who share the same husband. Since such rivalry is usually seen among those who are similar to one another, the word ‘sāpatnaka’ also gives the secondary sense of ‘resemblance’.
[32]The purport is that the bee, which barely managed to survive through the winter, had a festive time, full of merry-making in spring (JR)
[33]The use of the dative case in ‘tṛṇāya mene’ is according to the grammatical rule ‘manyakarmaṇi’ (JR). 
[34]The non-contextual meaning relates to the respect which a royal bodyguard receives from others (JR)
[35]The bright faces of women lose their sheen and turn pale when their husbands go on a journey in spring. Mankha fancies that Spring takes away the golden sheen from the cheeks of lovelorn women and distributes it amongst the (golden-yellow) Campaka blossoms.
[36]The idea is that all the couples in the universe, afraid of the southern winds (i.e., fearing the agony which the southern winds may expose them to in the absence of their partners) stay put together in spring, thus ensuring Kama’s victory (JR).
[37]Tears result from smoke and dust alike (JR).
[38]Threatening is often accompanied by the shaking of the index finger (JR).
[39]Rāgarāja, the king of melodies, is the Pañcama note. 
[40]Spring is akin to a poet who re-creates the world and the golden Campaka flowers constitute a brightly-worded canto in that poet’s epic poem.
[41]The idea in the verse is as follows: The bees, their limbs smeared with the lustre of Kama’s unsheathed sword, are akin to Kama’s bodyguards (since the lustre of the weapons which kings carry can fall on the limbs of the bodyguards who surround them). Bodyguards tend to be noisy; they also get to enjoy many precious objects on account of the royal patronage which they receive (JR).
[42]The emperor does not bear the burden of his empire all by himself but distributes it among his subordinates; he also his kingdom in the hands of a courageous hero (JR).
[43]The half-open Campaka flower resembles a golden inkpot while the black-coloured bees within give the appearance of ink. 
[44]The non-contextual idea pertains to a mistress (spring’s beauty) whose munificent husband (the Kimśuka tree) provides both food and lodging to his supplicant (bee) (JR).
[45]The purport of the verse is that women could not carry on with their love anger in the romantic ambience of the spring season. Whatever love anger was piled up in their mind vanished without a trace in the spring season, never to return back. It is believed that one will not return back if one meets a Śramaṇa mendicant while embarking on a journey, (JR). 
[46]The floral cup, because of its depth, is compared to a pond. ‘Rasāyu’ and ‘talla’ are two rare Sanskrit words for bee and lake respectively.
[47]According to Ramayana (Bālakāṇḍa, 57-59) the sage Vishvamitra created a second heaven for the king Trishanku 
[48]Prisoners are set free when a new king is coronated; kings receive a ritual ablution during their coronation ceremony. In this verse, the minds of maidens are the prisoners, shackled by the chain of love anger, and the mango juice is the holy water for the ritual ablution. 
[49]Since Kama wields a flowery bow, the creepers that are bent under the burden of spring’s blossoms can aptly serve his purpose.
[50]The non-contextual meaning of the verse pertains to a gallant who is puffed up because of his friendship with the king (rasaparivṛḍhasakhyāhaṅkṛtaḥ) amasses great wealth (parimalāḍhyambhāvukaḥ), is attractive to women (keralīnāṃ vipulapulakavedhāḥ), goes about spreading news about the royal family (mānmathagranthakāraḥ), and is given to fickleness of character (cāpalāni śiśikṣe). The king of sentiments (rasaparivṛḍha) is the sentiment of love (śṛṅgāra) that is synonymous with Kama (JR).    
[51]One plays with sand in childhood, with daggers in youth, and with ball in between these two stages (JR). 
[52]The millstone (gharaṭṭa) consists of a stationary lower and a rotatable upper disc. In this verse, the flower is akin to the lower disc, the circle of bees revolving above to the upper disc, and the love anger of women to the grain that is ground to powder by placing it in between the two discs. The purport of the verse is that the anger of women, directed at their lovers, disappeared the moment they saw a blooming blossom with bees hovering above (JR).
[53]Calluses are found on the arms of soldiers because of the continuous pulling of bowstrings. The word ‘pariṇamat’ (‘maturing’/’developing’) has been employed by the poet to foreground the fact that calluses turn darker as they mature (JR).
[54]Kama’s arm itches to discharge the flowery arrows on the world (JR).
[55]According to the Sanskrit poetic convention, serpents reside amidst sandalwood trees.  
[56]The purport of the verse is that the lovelorn wives of wayfarers, to whom the sight of flowers with bees alighting on them was unbearable, were pushed to the brink of death; the occurrence of multiple lunar eclipses during the day is an evil omen (JR). 
[57]In this verse, Mankha compares spring to a clerk who, because of his superior deceitfulness, is a cause of amazement to all other clerks. Since the petals of the Vicakila flower are white in colour, the comparison with sheets of paper is appropriate; JR notes that the compound word ‘āyavyaya’ (‘profit and loss’) in the context of lovelorn persons stands for their reunion or otherwise with their partners. Life breaths get added to or subtracted from them depending on whether a reunion materializes or not.
[58]The idea in this verse is as follows: The winter snow renders the sunlight feeble. The latter must therefore destroy the former if it should shine brightly once again. Mankha compares the sunlight to a sorcerer, who, intending to destroy his enemy, destroys his mannequin. Since snow is white, the white Kunda jasmine can suitably serve as its dummy. The Kunda flower, according to the Sanskrit poetic convention, withers away in spring. This withering away of the Kunda flower is conceived by the poet as the destruction of the snow’s mannequin by the vernal sunlight. Having destroyed the enemy’s mannequins many times over, the sunlight emerges victorious, breaks free of all limitations, identified with the clouds that surround it, and shines brightly once more.  
[59]A rare instance of the usage of the word ‘guñjā’ in the sense of drum 
[60]The verse alludes to the various attributes of the breeze such as fragrance, coolness, and gentleness. The non-contextual meaning relates to a carefree paramour who goes around receiving embraces from women (JR). 
[61]Guards work on rotation; when one of them goes to sleep, another wakes up and takes charge (JR). 


#========
Canto07


1. In this manner, when the season of flowers had assumed a splendour that was dear to Kama, Lord Shiva, desirous of beholding the beauty of the Crystal Mountain, started off along with Parvati, daughter of the mountain.[1]
2. Through the flames of the fire that dwelt in his forehead (i.e., in his third eye) and the rays of the moon that was fastened to his crest, Shiva made a lane of trees in the mountain’s grove come alive with an abundance of fresh foliage and flowers.[2]
3. When Shiva and Parvati graced the grove with their glances, Kama, whose primary abode is the Ashoka tree, experienced a blend of fear and solace in his mind.[3]
4. Spellbound by everything that came within his range, Shiva drank in, with his three eyes, the scenic expanse of the Season – smiling handsomely by way of the swaying Vicakila buds. 
5. Trained, as it were, by creepers around, whose tips were shaken by the breeze from Mt. Malaya, even Shiva’s head shook admiringly in spring’s presence.
6. The trees that grew on the adjacent slope of the mountain were watered without effort for a long time by the Celestial River’s waters, released from Shiva’s head when he shook it in excessive wonder.[4]  
7. When Shiva let his glances fall on them, all the creepers in the forest covered themselves in clouds of pollen dust as if to conceal Kama, who was situated in their midst.[5]
8. Through the intermingled, far-reaching lustres of the moon on his crest and the fire in his eye, the Lord – master of the universe – seemed to offer Spring a lesson in the Yogic practice of enduring both heat and cold with equanimity.[6] 
9. Having thus befriended with his eyes the effects brought about by the season (i.e., spring) that is replete with sweet scents of various kinds – the Lord adorned Parvati’s ear with this gem of a speech.[7]
10. “Respected lady! Do honour the spring with your side glances that are akin to Ketaka blossoms in which bumblebees rove hither and tither. May the edge of the woods be chequered with Kama’s pet blackbuck.[8] 
11. Long-eyed maiden! The unbearably hot sun produces progressively more and more clusters of sweat drops – vying with droplets of water sprayed by the elephant that is Kama – on your moon-like face.[9]
12. Make the cluster of wakeful lotuses a guest of your unsteady glances. Let the emperor of seasons enjoy the privilege of being fanned by fanciful black-white flywhisks because of them.[10]
13. Daughter of the Mountain King! Long envious of lotuses that dare to challenge its natural beauty, your face cannot withstand being touched by their friend’s (the sun’s) rays/foot.[11]
14. Therefore, allow this parasol – resembling a circle of fresh clouds – that the attending servant holds over you to assume the role of a black cobra lying coiled up close by to safeguard your impeccably beautiful form standing for a treasure trove.[12]
15. Away now with this saffron business. Pray besmear each and every limb with the juice of sandalwood, mimicking the moonlight liquefied by Kama’s fiery valour.[13] 
16. Robbed of its place on the bodies of pretty-eyed maidens by powdered Sandalwood, Saffron, it seems, is overcome by jealous anger, wherefore, masquerading as clusters of red flowers, it hangs firmly by a noose from Asoka creepers.
17. No sooner did the Emperor of all seasons have his coronation bath in the tears of wayfarers’ youthful wives than the Patali flowers – robberesses stealing the beauty of your lips – were deprived of their budded state/sleep.[14]
18. Each and every Tree that youthful women tightly embrace with their taut, bud-like breasts becomes covered in flowers aplenty and receives an unprecedented cheering from Bees.[15]
19. Their eyes veiled by the pollen of creepers, youthful men everywhere became the students of Winds arising from Mt. Malaya and received initiation in the hallowed, mystical tradition of Kama.[16]
20. Over here glows a Palasa tree/flesh-eating spirit – embodied sudden death to lovelorn women – whose red-coloured flowers, shaken up by the wind, look like several, stocked up souls of slain wayfarers.[17]
21. Subduing the scent of cardamom with its ichor-like fragrance, the breeze from Malaya – a gust of wind from the flapping ears of the rutting elephant that is Kama – intoxicates the worlds heavily in a rather unusual way.[18]
22. Lady with a smiling countenance! This southern breeze, like the Sandalwood Mountain’s breath, makes the row of cuckoos – precious emerald conch shells – emit an (auspicious) cry for securing Kama’s victory.[19]
23. Look yonder! Its tongue duped by the pollen drops of Vicakila flowers that create a mirage of moon rays, the young Chakora desists forever from drinking even the truly real mass of moonlight.[20] 
24. And now, these winds – born from the Direction dear to Death and resembling the breaths of the python that is Kama – immerse the bodies of lovelorn ladies in lakes filled with the deadliest venom.[21]
25. As soon as Sage Spring offers the hearts of wayfarers’ wives in love’s fire, a swarm of bees emerges like a line of sacrificial smoke from his cottage – the Bakula tree. 
26. Attaining brilliance after donning the iron armours that are the swarms of bees (adhering to them), these trees, standing for soldiers, make sure that Kama’s command rests comfortably upon the crowns of all Devas and Asuras.[22] 
27. Spring incurred a sin by lengthening the wayfarers’ lovelornliness. But he mitigated it by contracting the nights and thereby shortening the Chakravaka’s state of separation.[23]
28. [“For her, spring and winter are the same: The unfavourable/northern breeze blows continuously; the night’s watches are extremely long; and the body horripilates as well as shivers excessively.[24]
29. For that maiden with a moonlike frame, even a bed made of lotus leaves – dark green parasols in Kama’s army – transforms into a family of Rahus.[25]
30. Due as if to her anger at the extremely hostile spring, the slender-limbed lady gives shelter to the summer in her body – scorched excessively by sorrow – and the monsoon in her copiously watery eyes.[26]
31. Resting the face on the palm, bathing the bosom with tears, and drinking in hot sighs – her life’s journey is reduced to this in your separation.[27]
32. Under the pretext of a row of bees that are held in a spell by her naturally fragrant breaths, she lays bare the fact that her life is being forcefully sucked out of her by the black serpents in Death’s noose.[28]
33. Putting her into a deep swoon (literally ‘weave her the thick garment of deep swoon’), the Wind from Mt. Malaya stops her eyes from striking the edge of her ears, desirous as it were to make the deer which he rides a stranger to the experience of shameful humiliation.[29]
34. Unable to tolerate the noisy buzz of bees, this frail girl fixes her gaze upon her breast as if to somehow listen to you, who resides in her heart’s abode.[30]  
35. The southern breeze would have undoubtedly carried her singularly slender body off with much force had not the weight of her projecting breasts and buttocks been a hindrance.”]
36. Emitting poison-laden nectar from their mouths as they narrate the great pangs of separation suffered by maidens, their female confidants, having hurriedly approached the youthful lovers, report to them as described above in emotionally charged words.[31]
37. The Sindhuvara – Kama’s bright fame in a different form - torments lovelorn individuals by making the creeper of endurance wither away in their hearts with a shower of huge hailstones that are its buds.[32] 
38. Liberated from the womb of thick snowstorms, the sunlight more or less manages to attain its natural state. Forever fresh and growing stronger by the minute, it brings relief to the world.[33]
39. The southern breeze seems to fly Kama’s banners of universal victory over the breasts of Murala maidens by making the hem of their garments flutter.[34]
40. The wind from Simhala – stage-managing the non-stop amorous sports of youthful men and raining fire afresh upon the bodies of the lovelorn – is an astonishingly ambidextrous archer who never fails to shatter the target that is the love anger.[35]
41. The garden, wherein fires of agony burn in the form of blooming Asokas and the leaves of Tamala trees sway like sword blades, is a hellish place for tall-breasted ladies whose great sin is their unrelenting love anger.[36]
42. The mango tree’s pollen cloud, spread around by the wind, imitates a curtain stretched across in front of the actor, Kama, who is all set to play his role in the drama titled ‘Slaughter of the wayfarers’ wives’.
43. How can ladies overcome by love anger sleep peacefully in spring, when twangs emanating from the string of Kama’s curved bow deafen the inner recesses of the seven worlds and bees buzz around noisily?”
44. and 45. In this way, the Lord, whose crest ornament is the crescent moon, bestowed a special honour upon Parvati with an abundance of sweet words – taverns serving the draught of auditory ambrosia. And then Nandi faced the Lord and spoke gently and clearly in the following manner, the copious lustre of his teeth forging a novel association between the spring season and the spiny leaves of the Ketaka plant.[37] 
46. “The eyes are drunk as it were with the splendour of the day. The limbs are soothed by the sprightly sun’s touch. And here’s more, O Lord! As I behold the vernal season’s virgin beauty, my mind, filled with a causeless yearning, cannot contain itself anywhere.[38]
47. Master! Direct the playful glances of your eyes – companions of the sun, fire, and moon – at yonder horizon just for a moment. Let their collective splendour besmear the Directions with a mixture of saffron and sandal paste.[39]
48. Look how this season – adorned with flowers – shines forth. It anoints the sky with streams of molten emerald, infuses moonlight with the glow of crystals, and initiates the directions into the monistic order of absolute fragrance.[40]
49. The circle of directions, interspersed with golden Ketakas, Sindhuvaras, and Ashoka creepers (in full bloom), presents to view a series of rainbows kept ready by Spring for the sake of Kama’s victory over the world.[41]
50. Earlier, the Sun had taken recourse to the south and the Wind was associated with the north. But now, Spring – friend of lively Mango trees in bloom – brings about a mutual exchange of their directions.[42]
51. & 52. Look how even the bee couples, climbing onto the tips of Champaka blossoms, swayed by the graceful, gently blowing southern breeze, seem now to have been tutored by spring in swing sports. Therefore, let the fun-loving Goddess grace the swing so she can conceal the semblance of the sky to blue Atasi flowers with the radiance of her (golden) cheeks that surpass the Champakas.”[43]
53. Having drunk in with his ears these ambrosial words of Nandi, Shiva spoke thus to Devi, the flood of rays streaming forth from his teeth creating afresh yet another snowfall in the directions.[44]
54. “O moon-faced Maiden, learned in the supernatural lore of Kama’s magical art! What Nandin just said is right, so get hold of the requisite paraphernalia and satiate my starving eyes with a long-drawn-out feast of ambrosia.
55. Bind the swing to the sky the way you have bound my heart (to yourself through love). Move back and forth along with my glances (that shall follow you). And let the pearls adorning your neck create a new set of stars in the heaven.[45]
56. May these anklets, tied around your lotus-feet that are lively in the act of swinging, make the all-pervasive space reverberate with their noise and establish through direct perceptual knowledge the fact that sound is its (space’s) characteristic attribute.[46]
57. And after you have played on the swing, may your breath, heavy due to fatigue and drawing out, as it were, the fragrance of the floral arrows that Kama - dwelling in your heart - possesses, deprive the lotus thickets in the Celestial River of the bees that extol their (i.e., of the lotus thickets) sweet scent.[47]
58. Lady with thick thighs! It seems as if this gem-studded swing in front of us is extending to you – desirous of quickly climbing onto it - a hand from afar by way of the multitude of rays that is freely issuing from it.[48]
59. Sweetheart! Stretching wide its arms - rays streaming forth from the golden seat – the Swing, moved hither and thither by the agreeable breeze, appears to be dancing joyfully in mid-air anticipating the touch of your feet very soon.[49]
60. Through the loud jingle of its jiggling golden trinkets that are rattled by the wind flow, the Swing beseeches you, or so it seems, moment after moment. Do honour it by being seated without much ado”.
61. As she lent her ears to these words that were uttered by her dear lord, Uma’s frame bristled all over. Loosening up a bit after quite some time, she slowly climbed onto the swing, her eyes beaming with joy. 
62. Swinging nonstop this way and that way, Parvati - who shone forth brilliantly, thanks to her limbs that looked like chunks of gold, and fashioned a rainbow on both her sides with the (many-hued) rays of her bejewelled earrings – put on the pretty semblance of a lightning streak flashing across the cloudless sky.
63. Pervading the vast interspace of all the directions, the stream of Parvati’s unsurpassed loveliness flooded the sky. And she herself readily swam up and down in that stream many times over by going up and down on her swing.
64. During the swing sport, the moon came under Parvati’s feet, vanquished as it were by the beauty of her face, and momentarily put on the appearance of a swan summoned by the sound of her anklets. 
65. The swift wind greedily snatched away beads of sweat that had sprouted on her cheeks due to the vigorous play activity but compensated for the same, or so it seemed, by fetching her a cluster of the Celestial River’s water droplets, richly endowed with the fragrance of freshly bloomed golden lotuses swayed by it in sportive abandon.[50]
66. As she swung to and fro in the sky without restraint, the loose hem of her upper garment fluttered; her slowly rotating girdle produced a loud jingling noise; and the firmament reverberated with the sweet sound of her anklets. Thus she appeared like the lofty banner of Kama that proclaims his victory over the three worlds.[51]














________________
[1]The Crystal Mountain is Mt. Kailasa. JR notes that the poet’s use of words in both masculine and feminine genders in the first three lines of the verse (ratipariṇetā, antaraṅgī; samayaḥ, abhikhyā; śikharī, śrīḥ) counters the possible charge of licentiousness against Shiva that he alone, of all people, was immersed in enjoying the scenery along with his wife. By juxtaposing words in the masculine and feminine gender, Mankha suggests that this was not the case – that not just Shiva and Parvati, but other couples too, were having a private moment with one another during the spring season.
[2]The flames resemble fresh foliage and the rays of the moon appear like floral clusters amidst them. According to the Sanskrit poetic convention, flowers, in general, are said to be white in colour unless otherwise specified (sāmānyopādāne puṣpāṇāṃ śuklatā; Kāvyamīmāṃsā, 15) 
[3]The fear and solace stemmed from Shiva’s and Parvati’s glances respectively (JR) 
[4]Effortlessly = without the effort of having to fetch water from elsewhere (JR).
[5]Kama resides in the midst of creepers because he must procure his flowery arrows from them
[6]Mankha repeatedly qualifies Shiva as the universal master (see also 2.47, 16.1, 16.59, 20.57, 23.6, 24.9, 24.31, 24.38, 25.150)
[7]The effects include making creepers put forth flowers, etc. (JR).
[8]The Ketaka blossom and the roving bee stand for the white and the black of the eye respectively (JR). When Parvati lets her glances fall on the forest’s edge, the intermingled glow of the black and the white of her eyes conjures up a herd of blackbucks which have a black coat and a white underbelly.
[9] The epithet ‘āyatākṣi’ (‘long-eyed maiden’) used by Shiva to address Parvati suggests the spontaneous expansion of her eyes (due to astonishment) (JR).
[10] The black-white glances are likened to black-white flywhisks
[11]The epithet ‘Daughter of the Mountain King’ is appropriate to describe Parvati since it is indicative of her self-esteem and intolerance to humiliation (JR). 
[12]Serpents are described as safeguarding hidden treasures (JR).
[13]Saffron, according to Ayurveda, is hot in potency (‘kuṅkumaṃ surabhi tiktakaduṣṇaṃ’, Rājanighaṇṭu, Candanādivarga, 41) and therefore not suited for application in the hot weather of the spring season (JR). 
[14]Afraid of being punished, robbers lose sleep when an emperor is coronated (JR). 
[15]The breasts are taut because the women press them tightly against the trees. The non-contextual meaning relates to a paramour (tree), who is a darling of women and is embraced by them and on whom libertines (bees) heap praises and shower flowers (JR).  
[16]The purport of the verse is that youthful men came under the influence of Kama when the Malaya winds blew. Spiritual masters blindfold their disciples with a piece of cloth while imparting mystical knowledge to them (JR) – also see 11.6
[17]The individual soul (jīva) is known to glow brightly (and is therefore fiery red) and is also tremulous (JR). Elsewhere (13.9), Mankha compares a Tilaka-mark to the steadily glowing soul of Kama.
[18]Though the southern breeze and the gust of wind raised by the flapping ears of an elephant belong to the same category (i.e., of air), the latter has been used as a metaphor for the former because the two arise from two different sources (JR). The appropriateness of alluding to cardamom stems from the fact that it is native to Mt. Malaya (‘elālatāliṅgitacandanāsu ---malayasthalīṣu’, Raghuvaṃśa, 6.64).
[19]The black cuckoos are here compared to emerald-studded conch shells blown by Mt. Malaya with the latter’s breath, namely, the southern breeze. JR notes that conch shells are blown as a sign of auspiciousness and good omen before kings set out on a victory march. According to him, the word ‘pālī’ in the compound ‘śaṅkha-pālī’ denotes excellence, in this case the ‘preciousness’ of the conch shells that are blown, just as it does in the compound ‘gaṇḍapālī’. The English translation retains both this rare sense of ‘excellence’ and the commoner sense of ‘row’.
[20]According to the Sanskrit poetic convention, Cakoras subsist on moonlight. JR observes that the word ‘śāva’ (‘young’) in the compound ‘cakoraśāva’ is intentional (because only young cakoras could be so naïve as to confuse the pollen of Vicakila flowers for moonlight).
[21]Yama, the lord of death, is the son of the Sun God and presides over the southern direction - from which arise the winds of Mt. Malaya that are fatal to lovelorn ladies. The description of these winds as ‘born from the Direction dear to Death’ is therefore suggestive (JR).
[22]Soldiers see to it that their master’s orders are correctly implemented (JR). 
[23]According to the Sanskrit poetic convention, the Cakravāka couples are separated at night and reunited at daybreak. 
[24]A set of 9 related verses forming a kulaka begins with this verse. These verses describe the pangs of separation which lovelorn ladies undergo. The night’s watches are long for the lovelorn lady because of the dragging nature of her sorrowful condition; the shivering and horripilation result from recollecting the private moments of pleasure which she spent in her lover’s company. The night’s watches are long in winter, shivering and horripilation are common, and wind blows from the north.   
[25]Rahu acts inimically towards the moon.  
[26]Since the summer and the rainy seasons are opposed to the spring on account of their differing features and since the spring tortures her, the lovelorn lady in this verse gives shelter to the summer and rainy seasons in her body according to commonly accepted saying ‘The enemy’s enemy is a friend’ (JR). 
[27]The idea is that, for this lovelorn lady, everyday activities such as taking rest, bathing, and drinking are reduced to resting the face on the palm, bathing the chest with tears, and drinking in hot sighs.
[28]The idea is that the rows of black bees attracted to the lovelorn maiden’s breath appear like the black serpents in Yama’s noose come to draw the life breaths out of her. Mankha repeatedly alludes to the serpents in Yama’s noose (see also 16.44, 22.3, 22.5, 22.23, 22.54, 23.2).
[29]The wind (identified with the Wind God) rides a deer. Deer are known for their elongated eyes. The lovelorn lady described in this verse also has elongated eyes that stretch as far as the ears and therefore question the deer’s claim to fame for possessing long, beautiful eyes. The Wind from Mt. Malaya aggravates her sorrow and puts her into a deep swoon, thereby shutting her eyes. Mankha fancies that the wind does so in order to save his deer the infamy of defeat at the hands of this long-eyed maiden (JR). The word ‘tantuvāya’ (‘weaver’) has been used in the secondary sense of ‘causing’ (swoon, in this case). 
[30]The purport is that her face was downcast in worry (JR). 
[31]The words of the female confidants are compared to poison-laden nectar because as much as they describe the immense sorrow of the lovelorn women, they also elicit pity in the hearts of their lovers, thereby offering them a glimmer of hope during tough times (JR). 
[32]The use of the genitive case in ‘viyogijanasya tudati’ is according to the rule ‘karmaṇi śeṣe ṣaṣṭhī’ (JR).
[33]Upa+vad carries the meaning of ‘soothe’
[34]The hem of the Murala maiden’s garment, fluttering in the breeze, excites passion, wherefore Mankha compares it to Kama’s banner (JR). 
[35]The word ‘savyasācī’ (‘ambidextrous’) may have been used merely in the sense of ‘skilful’ or to imply that the wind shatters the love anger of both the parties involved in a romantic relationship.  
[36]Nirayati is a nominal verb form that is derived from the noun niraya (hell). It can be understood as ‘niraya iva ācarati’ (‘behaves like hell’). Fires burn in the hell and the trees that grow there have swords for their leaves.
[37]The Ketaka plant with spiny leaves characterizes the monsoon, wherefore the poet qualifies its association with the spring season as novel (JR). The idea here is that the beams of lustre emanating from Nandi’s bright teeth appeared like the white, serrated leaves of the Ketaka plant. A pair of related verses is called ‘yugalaka’.
[38]The vernal sun is soothing because its rays are neither too hot nor dampened by excessive cold; It is sprightly because clouds of fog no longer conceal it (JR). JR glosses ‘utkaṇṭhā’ as ‘ruharuhikā’, a rarely used word in Sanskrit literature.
[39]The moonlight is akin to sandal paste on account of its white colour and cool touch whereas the lustre of the sun and the fire together resemble saffron due to their blazing redness and heat – saffron is hot in potency according to Ayurveda (JR). 
[40]The overall purport of the verse is that the spring season renders the sky, the moonlight, and the directions greenish-blue, bright white, and richly fragrant respectively (JR).
[41]The three flowers described in this verse are of yellow, white, and red colours. The intermingling of these colours produces the effect of a variegated rainbow (JR).
[42]The non-contextual meaning pertains to a king (spring) who orders mutual transfer of officials (sun and wind) (JR). The mango in bloom (unnidra) likely stands for an ever vigilant (unnidra) minister on whom the king reposes trust.
[43]Verses 51 and 52 together form a yugalaka since they are logically interrelated (i.e., since even pairs of bees are enjoying swing sports, it behoves the Goddess also to play on the swing with her husband). The poetic idea in verse 52 is this – Whenever the Goddess will go up towards the sky while playing on the swing, its blue hue will be temporarily hidden by the glow of her golden cheeks.
[44]The meaning of ‘Bhūyo’pi’ (‘afresh’) is this: Before the advent of spring, winter had brought in its wake many a snowfall. Presently, Shiva seemed to bring about yet another snowfall in the directions with the rays of his teeth. 
[45]The Lord tries to motivate Parvati to play on the swing through such words (JR).
[46]According to the school of Tarka-logic, the characteristic attribute of space is sound (‘śabdaguṇakamākāśam’, Tarkasaṅgraha). As Parvati ascends high into the celestial space during her swing play, she will no longer be seen; only the sound of her anklets will be heard (thus strengthening the association between space and sound) (JR).
[47]In this verse, the Lord motivates Parvati to play on the swing by cleverly suggesting that he shall push the swing so high it will reach the heavenly Ganga. Shiva demonstrates his love for Parvati by describing her breaths as being fragrant even in the fatigue of sport, thereby suggesting her divine nature (JR).  
[48]Since the Goddess has thick thighs, it is appropriate to describe her as requiring some help in ascending the swing (JR).
[49]One stretches one’s arms wide and dances when in a joyful mood (JR).
[50]One who borrows something from someone returns it back to him/her along with interest (JR).
[51]A banner too has a fluttering piece of cloth, is adorned with jingling trinkets, and symbolizes victory (JR). 


#========
Canto08


1. As soon as Parvati got down from the swing with limbs rendered weary by the drawn-out sport, Shiva grabbed her quickly with his arms.
2. On Parvati’s cheek, clusters of saffron-tinged sweat beads were lost amidst the pollen grains that were scattered about when the blue lotuses adorning her ear pressed against each other in the thick of play.[1]
3. Her silken robes fluttering, Shiva’s chaste consort freely and repeatedly embraced the cool air with her limbs that were overpowered by fatigue, for she knew it (i.e., air) was one among her eight-formed lord’s pleasing forms.[2] 
4. By making the sweat drops on Parvati’s body a thing of the past (i.e., by carrying the sweat away), the breaking billows of the river on Shiva’s crest acted as white whisks.[3]
5. Feeling thirsty as it were due to his proximity with the fire in the third eye, the Moon on Shiva’s crest brought the tips of his rays/hands together and sucked in Parvati’s profuse outpour of sweaty water. 
6. The wind quickly lapped up every drop of sweat from Parvati’s pitcher-like breasts through the lotus leaves that were waved by Vijaya as if they (i.e., the leaves) were emerald goblets.[4]
7. Her very own row of curly tresses, moved to and fro by the momentarily uneven breaths, seemed to fan her.
8. Cuckoos, attentively perched on the mango trees in the vicinity, fanned her with puffs of air produced by the flapping of their wings – puffs of air that were adept in allaying fatigue (i.e., refreshing puffs of air) - since they were her pupils in imbibing an outstanding sweetness of voice.[5]
9. And so, as the Redness over the cheeks made a hasty retreat, the profuse Perspiration slipped away, and the fast Breathing came to a halt, Tiredness was left without a teammate in her body.
10.  The incessant swing play had caused every adornment on Parvati’s body to slip away. Strangely, though, Shiva thought she was as all the more adorned because of this very reason. 
11.  Since the rays of the moon on Shiva’s crown made her lotus-face bloom, the tradition of non-duality established by Kama reigned supreme in all its glory.[6]
12.  Beaming with bright lustre, Parvati’s face - as pretty as the moon/a moonstone - stopped exuding sweat drops/droplets of water as Shiva’s hands/the sun’s rays repeatedly caressed it.[7]
13.  Having thus freed her physical frame from prolonged exhaustion by taking recourse to many a cooling technique, she desired to make the bond between creepers and the spring season fruitful by gathering their flowers.[8]
14.  Desiring to amass the floral bounty of trees, she initially dispatched her glances towards them – more splendid than pearls inlaid with sapphires – as a bargain, or so it seemed.[9] 
15.  As her breaths went about the task of freely distributing fragrance everywhere, flowers were relieved of their burden, namely, the crowd of bees soliciting them.[10]
16.  And then, as Vijaya and others - the wives of preeminent Pramathas – followed her, the sound of their bejewelled anklets served as the very first orchestra to commemorate the festive occasion of Kama’s ascent to fame.[11] 
17.  Shaken by the winds from Kerala, each and every creeper appeared to Parvati’s eyes like it was trembling excessively in the fear of its (wealth of) flowers getting stolen shortly. 
18.  Her eyes, marvelling at the sudden surge in nature’s beauty, were fixed on each and every fancy creeper, seemingly bound to it by the iron fetters in the form of swarms of bees.
19.  Karnikaras, growing in an enclosure of closely packed trees, gently caressed the lanky frames of divine damsels, desirous as it were of imbibing a novel fragrance, unknown even to the Creator, by coming in contact with the limbs of women.[12]
20.  The very Bakula tree which used to delight lady bees immensely by continuously offering them mouthfuls of nectar now craved for mouthfuls of wine from the amorous ladies in Girija’s retinue.[13] 
21.  A Tilaka tree, situated in the path that extended before the heavenly damsels, readily began to fashion the arrows of the flower-armed Kama (literally, ‘readily became the arrow maker of Kama’) the very moment they let their eyes fall on it just casually.[14]
22.  Desiring to be effortlessly touched all over by the feet of the visiting celestial nymphs, the Asoka tree, disguised as its own reflection, hid in the grove’s gem-studded pavement.
23.  The ladies were simultaneously responsible for the creation, sustenance, and annihilation of the class of Ashoka flowers: they brought it into being with the kick of their feet, made it bloom, and lopped it off with their fingernails.[15]
24.  Though bereft of nectar for a long time now, the row of Ashoka trees turned into a Cow of Plenty for the bees as soon as the wives of the celestial lords playfully touched it with their lively feet.[16]
25.  The Bakula tree was esteemed by the class of twice-born birds/Brahmins  though it was drunk with the wine spat on it by lovely ladies whereas the Kunda trees were ruined, and sadly so, in spite of possessing closely clustering branches/intently practising their Vedic Schools.[17]
26.  A certain damsel placed her foot on an Ashoka tree whereupon it instantly put forth a cluster of red flowers though it was long before she herself realized it because the tree was bathed everywhere in the dense lustre of her anklets which were fashioned from fresh rubies.[18] 
27.  No sooner did pretty-eyed women forcefully kick the Asoka tree with their foot, its anklet jingling, than the tree burst into buds that stole the beauty of their lips.[19]
28.  Fashioned into an ear ornament, the Asoka blossom helped women in yet another way: Its reflection on their cheek appeared like a decorative design drawn with fresh saffron.
29.  The celestial women subjected even the Atimukta flower/liberated seer –  born in the wild, on the path running along the forest – to various transformations after clipping it off with their nails/with their nail marks.[20] 
30.  A certain lady took revenge on the cuckoos for their hostile act of mocking her speech by stripping the mango tree of its floral bounty, thereby depriving them of their accommodation.[21]  
31.  Another lady plucked the flower of an Asoka tree with her hand and wore it on her head to seemingly pacify the tree’s long-standing anger on account of her misconduct in the form of carelessly kicking it with her foot.
32.  A newly blossomed Champaka flower that was worn by the women in the vicinity of their ear blended harmoniously with their golden earring and (golden) cheek.
33.  Because it was akin to her lover’s (golden-hued) limbs, one clever girl kept gazing at the Champaka flower – made noisy by the buzz of bees within and therefore appearing like the ornamental golden bell of the majestic elephant that is Kama.[22]
34.  The divine damsels adorned their serpentine braid so richly with the slough-like (i.e., white) Tagara blossoms that a swarm of bees, alighting on it (i.e., the braid), created the semblance of a second braid.
35.  A certain woman adorned her ear with a newly blossomed red Kimshuka flower, tucked therein by her husband with his own hands. Surprisingly, however, it was her co-wife’s face that turned red instantly.[23]
36.  Yet another maiden, wanting to gather flowers from a branch that was higher up, raised her heels off the ground. But the heavy breasts, weighing her body down by their burden, frustrated her desire.
37.  Tucked over the ear by one lady, a Sinduvara flower assumed the natural splendour of a blossoming smile by being reflected on her cheek.
38.  Every tree, the tip of whose branch the women first pulled down and then released after gathering flowers, bounced back the moment it was freed of its distortion only to shake, in anger as it were, for a long time thereafter.[24]
39.  When one of those ladies playfully shook a tree, the latter, apparently angry, filled her eyes with pollen dust, thus providing her lover with an opportunity to embrace his second sweetheart.[25]
40.  So much pollen was raised from the creepers when the wives of the foremost among gods shook them that it kept Spring and Cupid – known for their causeless friendship – engaged in continuous dust play.[26] 
41.  Thus did the pretty-faced women tightly hug a tall tree before climbing it that the youths of heaven desired to be born as trees and trees alone.[27] 
42.  Ready to climb up a tree, one young lady placed her feet on it, making it sprout clusters of red flowers with their (i.e., the feet’s) dense glow so it could surpass the Ashoka.[28]
43.  The Atimukta flowers, resembling pearls, conjured up a pearl necklace over the pitcher-like breasts of the womenfolk and a bunch of bees spontaneously became the sapphire pendent hanging from its (i.e., the necklace’s) centre. 
44.  Through a circle of rays issuing forth from the nails of her hand that was waved around to greedily nip flowers , a certain lady tied a silken turban, or so it appeared, around the Bakula’s crest in order to crown it the emperor among trees.[29]
45.  Another tree, shaken by someone’s lotus-like hand, continuously rained down flowers from high above on a young maiden – Kama’s patron goddess – who was walking below.[30]
46.  Since the mango tree had helped the women by gifting them flowers, they too watered it, as if to render help in return, with streams of tears brought on by (the tree’s) pollen.
47.  Landing on the playful women’s cheeks that bore the strong scent of jasmines fashioned into ear ornaments, undulating swarms of bees reiterated the musk designs drawn therein (i.e., on the cheeks).  
48.  Drenched in drops of floral nectar, each and every limb of the pretty-eyed women in Shiva’s retinue seemed to ooze liquid beauty by coming in direct contact with the sun’s scorching heat. 
49.  It seemed as if the Karavira flower, grasped gracefully by the girls with the tips of their hands, had already been strung effortlessly into a garland on the fine thread of rays emerging from the nails.
50.  Flowers – much too sinful on account of exterminating every wayfarer without purpose – were bound up tightly with strings by the ladies, who served as the female attendants of the Emperor among sentiments (i.e., love).[31]  
51.  The Pramatha maidens sported many a pretty flower of this and that kind on each and every beautifiable limb of their bodies, whose innate softness was forever unimpaired.[32]
52.  Until now, the bumblebee, clinging to one particular flower, had been filled with a strong longing for another flower (in front of it). But now, after alighting on the bodies of the women who were adorned with flowers of every different kind, it stood still, free of any longing whatsoever.
53.  Averse to the bee’s buzz; deprived of shade/physical charm; and shaken beyond control by the wind/overcome with continuous trembling brought on by pitiful sighs - thus did the Creeper transform when she was separated from the endearing Floral Clusters.[33]
54.  A circle of bees, attracted to the strongly fragrant flowers which Parvati was wearing on her head and hovering behind her as she withered away in the sunlight, transformed into a dark blue parasol by coming in contact with a light beam issuing forth from her gem-studded crown.[34]
55.  When the beloved wives of the Pramathas robbed them thoroughly of their possessions in the season of flowers, the Trees, deprived suddenly of all charm, frantically threw their branch-arms up and seemed to shout “That’s not fair” through the loud hum emitted by teeming rows of confused bees that had settled on them because of their previous disposition.[35]
56.  The Pramatha maidens adorned their ears with the Champaka blossom, the vicinity of their sloping breasts with a garland of Atimukta flowers, and their heads with the fresh leaves of mango. By doing so, they also offered worship, at that very moment, to the God of Love, who resided permanently in their each and every limb.[36]
________________
[1]The saffron-tinged sweat drops could not be differentiated from the pollen grains that were similar in colour. The non-contextual meaning pertains to thieves (sweat beads) who impersonate others (pollen grains) and remain submerged under water waiting for an opportune time (JR).
[2]The idea is that Parvati did not lose her chastity in spite of hugging the air since the latter is counted among the eight forms of Shiva.
[3]The breaking waves of Ganga are compared to white whisks because of their appearance and cooling action (JR).
[4]One drinks the water collected in a pitcher after filling it in a goblet. The purport is that Parvati’s sweat drops evaporated when Vijaya fanned her with lotus leaves
[5]The non-contextual meaning pertains to pupils (cuckoos) who render service to their master (Parvati) with the help of intermediary teachers (puffs of air) (JR).
[6]The idea expressed in this verse is as follows: The moon and the lotus are opposed to one another (according to the Sanskrit poetic convention). However, overriding this rule, the moon on Shiva’s crest delighted Parvati’s lotus-face. This, in turn, was a boost to Kama’s notion of non-duality according to which even mutually opposed objects can be unified by the power of love (JR). 
[7]The moonstone is believed to melt by the touch of the moon’s rays. The sun’s rays, by reverse logic, stop the moonstone from melting. The purport of the verse is that Shiva wiped away the sweat from Parvati’s face.
[8] Trees and creepers are supposed to bear fruits if women of the superior class pluck their flowers (JR).
[9]The black and white of Parvati’s eyes are compared to sapphire and pearl respectively. One who wants something from someone else first pays him/her something (JR).
[10]The purport of the verse is that bees, attracted to her fragrant breaths, no longer visited any flowers (JR). 
[11]Vijaya is frequently alluded to in Sanskrit literature as a close confidant of Parvati  
[12]The purport is this: The Karṇikāra, though colourful, is not endowed with fragrance. A fragrant Karṇikāra is therefore unknown to the Creator’s creation. The Karṇikāras described in this verse grow in a thicket of closely packed trees and, for this very reason, are able to touch the limbs of the divine damsels when they come to pluck flowers. The poet fancies that they caress the limbs of the women in order to imbibe a fragrance which the Creator cheated them of (JR).
[13]The poetic charm in this verse rests partly on the punning use of the word ‘bhṛṅgī’ which means both ‘female bee’ and ‘amorous lady’, though its use in the latter sense is rather rare.
[14]The idea in this verse hinges on the belief that the Tilaka tree puts forth flowers when beautiful women let their glances fall on it.
[15]The ‘jāti’ (general class of objects) becomes subject to creation, sustenance, and annihilation through the ‘vyakti’ (an individual member of the class) (JR). The idea in the verse is this: Different women were simultaneously engaged in bringing Aśoka flowers into being, making them bloom, and plucking them. Through the individual Aśoka flowers that they brought into bloom etc., they subjected the class of Aśoka flowers to the simultaneous acts of creation etc. 
[16]The purport is that the bees obtained more than enough nectar from Aśoka flowers in bloom. 
[17]The verse uses pun to bring out the paradox of Brahmins praising the drunkard and the Vedic scholar becoming fallen in the eyes of others (JR).
[18]The red flowers of the Aśoka tree were hidden by the red lustre of her ruby anklets.
[19]The stealing by the tree is a response to the humiliation of being kicked (JR).  
[20]The maidens created desire even in the liberated, forest-dwelling ascetic (JR). They fashioned various ornaments out of the Atimukta flower and thus transformed it in many ways.
[21]The purport is that she (and her associates) possessed a voice that was as sweet as the cuckoo’s (JR). 
[22]Elephants are adorned with bells. The Campaka flower resembles a golden bell both in colour and shape. The noise of the bees within gives it an additional semblance of a bell that is ringing. 
[23]The poetic charm in this verse hinges on the incongruity of cause and effect: the cause for redness (the flower) is present elsewhere (on the ear of one lady) and its effect, i.e., redness (due to anger), is seen elsewhere (on her co-wife’s face) (JR).
[24]The non-contextual meaning may relate to someone (tree) whom others (women) take advantage of for their own material gain (gathering of flowers) and forsake in the end. 
[25]The tree takes revenge on her by providing her lover an opportunity to embrace her rival. 
[26]Children engage in playing with dust. Since both Spring and Kama are associated with flowers (as the flowery season and the flower-arrowed respectively), it is appropriate to describe them as playing with pollen dust (JR). 
[27]One puts one’s arms around a tree before climbing it 
[28]It is the Aśoka tree that puts forth flowers when women touch it with their feet. Mankha fancifully describes that a different tree too did so and even managed to surpass the Aśoka. A beautiful sole is described as being pinkish red in colour.
[29]Silk is white and so are the rays emanating from the lady’s fingernails. A circle of such rays can resemble a white silk cloth that is fashioned into a turban.  
[30]Goddesses are worshipped with flowers (JR). The young maiden is described as Kama’s patron goddess because Kama counts on her beauty for conquering the world.
[31]The king’s soldiers chain criminals who cause unnecessary trouble to wayfarers (JR).
[32]The purport is that the ladies, because of the innate tenderness of their limbs, wore ornaments fashioned only from flowers (JR).
[33]The non-contextual meaning relates to a woman (creeper) of loose morals who has liaisons with multiple partners (flower clusters) and experiences lovelornliness when they abandon her (JR). The creepers no longer attract bees, are deprived of shade, and shake in the wind after their floral bulk has been taken away from them.
[34]The circle of bees is the canopy of the parasol and the light beam its shaft 
[35]The poet fancies the sudden recoiling of the branches after a long time (when the ladies had been pulling them down continuously) as the tree throwing its arms up in desperation (JR). 
[36]The adorning of limbs with flowers is compared by the poet to the act of showering flowers on Kama, who resides in those very limbs. 


#========
Canto09


1. And so the wives of the Pramathas, thickly mobbed by bees while hurrying to pluck flowers, seemed as if they had jumped into the dark waters of Yamuna for overcoming their burning fatigue.
2. The bodies of the divine damsels were adorned with the pollen of flowers sticking to their sweat drops, making it appear as if Lady Spring had smeared them with a cosmetic paste after arriving in haste.[1]
3. Her body coated completely in the thick pollen of Karnikara clusters, a certain Chakora-eyed lady, though dark-limbed, appeared as if she was fair-limbed to the fullest degree.
4. Another lady, her garment dyed deep yellow by the mass of pollen, appeared like Goddess Lakshmi who had taken a liking to wearing the robe of Vishnu, her yellow-robed husband. 
5. As if blown far away by their hurried breaths that resulted from excessive fatigue, the sun’s orb presently reached the middle of the sky.
6. At that moment, the sunlight turned increasingly harsh, heralding a heat menace due, as it were, to its violent friction against the upper surface of the sapphirine rock that is the sky.[2] 
7. It erased their Tilaka mark; washed away their saffron makeup; and drenched their bodies: the stream of sweat did everything to the doe-eyed damsels that a plunge in water would, everything except easing their exhaustion.
8. And very soon, the women, desirous of taking a dip in water, made their way to the Manasa Lake that seemed to have dispatched messengers towards them by way of the winds – bards of closely packed lotuses in bloom - arising from its waves.[3]
9. The fickle fish’s darting movements standing for its glances, the Lake eagerly beheld the moon-faced Pramatha women waiting on its bank.[4]
10.  Desiring relief from the intense fatigue, the women sat down on their buttocks, that easily passed for blocks of gold, atop the row of golden slabs by the lake’s bank.[5]  
11.  When the wind blew the free ends of the silken garments draped over their bodies, it appeared as if the lake’s bank too had mastered the art of creating frothy white waves.[6]
12.  Intolerant of further delay, the women seemed to have quickly plunged into the lake by way of their reflection even with their veils on. 
13.  Mirrored in the lake’s waters that looked like molten sapphire, the celestial damsels took on the beauty of water nymphs emerging out.[7]
14.  When the ladies – actresses in the drama of water frolic – reached the lake’s shoreline, the multitude of rising white waves appeared like a screen stretched in front of them. 
15.  It seemed as if the Lake, filled with multiple ripples/intense longing, wanted to quickly embrace the ladies in Parvati’s retinue by stretching out its wave-arms.
16.  Through their dainty gait, the women - endowed with lofty breasts/clouds that were raining droplets of sweaty water - subdued the pride/sexual passion of swans lining up on the bank.[8]
17.  The glances of pretty-eyed damsels fell sportively on a thick foamy mass – as beautiful as the bright mansion of Varuna’s womenfolk and similar in hue to their own smiles.[9]
18.  Did the noisy cluster of waves blow an auspicious conch – disguised as a clump of frozen froth adhering to its lip – at the commencement of Parvati’s bathing ritual?[10]
19.  Afraid, as it were, of coming in contact with water in the near future, the Ashoka buds – resembling a shower of sparks emanating from the fire of love – broke free from the thick mane of the curvy-browed ladies when they shook it from side to side.[11]
20.  Its fish darting around and milky foam swaying about like white flywhisks, a circle of waves, resembling the flag post of Kama, delighted the divine damsels.[12]
21.  The lake delighted the heavenly women by designing a second pearl necklace for them from a row of water droplets strewn over their chest that was distinguished by lofty, plump breasts.
22.  Thanks to the rays emitted by the gem-studded ornaments of the celestial nymphs, the lake’s banks were overlain as it were with rainbows gifted by the clouds come to quench their thirst in its watery expanse.[13]
23.  The womenfolk made the Chakravaka birds – native dwellers of the lake’s bank – elated as well as agitated through their lovely lower lips, whose red hue resembled the dawn, and faces, whose common friend was the moon’s radiant glow.[14]
24.  The close-set leaves of the lotuses – fancy sapphirine mirrors held up by aquatic deities – appeared like the dark sky in the vicinity of the moon that was the face of each pretty-eyed lady.[15]
25.  For a very long time, the Breeze blowing from the lake’s waves gave goosebumps, combined with tremor, to the Pramatha women by tightly embracing their bodies as their garments slipped off.[16]  
26.  The curvy-browed women’s row of faces, keen, as it were, to behold the birthplace of the lotuses – their friends in appearance - disappeared into the water after being reflected (on the lake’s surface).[17]
27.  The budding breasts of the pretty-eyed ladies, mirrored in the undulating waves of the lake, continuously put on the appearance of lively golden balls bounced up and down by the aquatic fairies.
28.  A swarm of bees abandoned its lotus when the water was agitated as if the (lotus-dwelling) Goddess of Fortune, curious to catch a glimpse of the celestial maidens, had pushed it out of her way from within the lotus. 
29.  The extremely long and curly tresses of the doe-eyed beauties, their knots loosened by young lovers, were seen with crippling fear by the aquatic elephants that mistook them for freshly fashioned fetters.[18] 
30.  As the celestial women plunged into the magnificent lake, their long locks appeared like swarms of bees entering the water in their fondness for the copious ichor of water elephants. 
31.  The Lake, thrilled by the sudden physical touch of the divine damsels, appeared to be covered in goosebumps masquerading as so many tiny droplets of water.[19] 
32.  The waves - blending beautifully with the saffron paste of the young maidens - put on the semblance of pretty Patala chaplets broken loose from the thick tresses of the water nymphs.
33.  A certain lady washed off the saffron from her slender body that bore the nail-marks made by her lover. And in doing so, she instantly turned the water red: so red, it resembled her co-wife’s (angry) face.[20]
34.  Seemingly terrified that it had robbed every bit of saffron from their limbs, the Water rushed down to quickly enter the deep, cavernous navels of the celestial women.[21] 
35.  As the women took a plunge, the lake’s water, rising high up in the vicinity of their unblemished moon-like faces, mimicked the ocean’s water.[22]
36.  As they immersed spontaneously in the lake’s water, the multitude of Apsaras/streams – stirred up by the amorous celestials/sprightly fish – caused it to breach the bank.
37.  The agitated Lake hit the heavenly beauties hard with canes in the form of its waves because they had robed the family of swans adorning its banks of its graceful gait.
38.  Made thoroughly turbid by the heavenly women’s cosmetic paste, comprising of the four fragrant ingredients in equal proportion, even Lake Manasa’s waters did not delight the swans dwelling on its bank.[23]
39.  A certain celestial maiden, desirous of playfully hitting her lover, pulled out a lotus filament from the lake, mistaking it, or so it seemed, for a piece of the ivory tusk of an aquatic elephant that was defeated by her graceful gait.
40.  It appeared as if the lake, betraying a red glow - thanks to the transfer of saffron paste from the bodies of the womenfolk - had received an untimely hug from the evening clouds that were desirous of imbibing its water.[24] 
41.  As the frenzied females took a passionate plunge into the water, their dark manes evidently simulated the ornamental black whisks of the best aquatic horses.[25]  
42.  Vanquished by the faces of the celestial damsels, the lotuses sunk deep into the perturbed mass of water to take refuge as it were in the navel-lotus of Vishnu, who rests in the nether abode of Bali.[26]
43.  The women uprooted a bunch of golden lotuses with their fingernails only to make the lake teem, or so it seemed, with a fresh growth of golden lotuses - their faces reflected in its water.[27]
44.  The maidens’ pair of breasts cast away its thick veil of saffron into the lake’s water to behold, as it were, a row of self-similar Chakravaka couples on the bank.[28]
45.  Possessed of an ardent desire to sport in the water, the Lord himself, accompanied by the Mountain King’s daughter, arrived at the lotus pond’s bank and adorned it. 
46.  Its lotuses sealed by the moon on his crest; its Chakravaka birds suffering unmatched sorrow due to his throat’s lustre that was mistaken for darkness; and its aquatic wealth depleted by the heat of his ocular fire, the lake stood helpless before him. 
47.  At that moment, Lake Manasa appeared to have attained supreme identity with the Moon-crested Lord by mirroring his divine form in its water, which robbed a stream of molten sapphire of its loveliness.[29]
48.  Due to the reflection of his third eye’s fire in its glistening waters, the famed lake seemed to forge a strange alliance with the submarine Aurva fire so as to shatter the ocean’s pride.[30]
49.  The pleasure lake seemed to mimic Shiva: It was whitened by foam and he was smeared in thick ash; It was bordered all around by golden lotuses and he exhibited a mass of flames emanating from his forehead; A tangled web of lotus leaves adorned its form and a dense dark glow (of poison) radiated from his throat.[31]
50.  Sporting the crest moon that had turned tawny from the flames of the fire in his eye and therefore resembled a golden syringe kept ready for water sports, the Lord, accompanied by Parvati, caused the lake to expand by diving into it, copious foam standing for its boisterous laughter.[32]  
51.  The lake seemed to worship Shiva continuously by showering on him white floral clusters of foam with its lively wave-hands. It also made a ceremonious gift of plentiful sapphire bracelets, disguised as rows of blue eddies, to the Goddess. 
52.  Parvati plunged into the oceanic lake as if, overcome by sisterly affection, she wanted to pay a surprise visit to the pitiable Mt. Mainaka whose abode is in the deep recesses of the nether world.[33]
53.  How strange! The lake attained grandeur even as Shiva’s/a peacock’s eyes were deeply fixed on Parvati’s ample and showy breasts/clouds.[34]
54.  Holding golden pitchers as it were in the form of the sun’s reflected orb, circles of Waves surrounded Parvati and bathed her continuously.[35]
55.  The great revelry of immersion in water/the Absolute blessed even the beloved mistress of the Universal Guru abundantly: It brought about a release of her tresses; removed makeup/desire from her body; instantly made her eyes kohl-free/free of falsehood; and richly endowed her with goosebumps and shivers.[36] 
56.  Though the huge, tumultuous waves of Ganga wash his crown, Shiva still plunged playfully into the water along with Parvati, the holy ash strewn around by his limbs duplicating the rays of the moon on his crest and endowing the lake – a fancy mirror for the Directions – with a singular brilliance.[37] 
________________
[1]That Lady Spring served them in the manner of an attendant shows that even she is inferior to them in beauty (JR). 
[2]Friction produces heat.
[3]‘Bards of lotuses’ is a roundabout poetic way of saying ‘imbued with the scent of lotuses’ (JR).
[4]The word ‘iva’ (‘as it were’) is intended here, along with ‘udapaśyat’ (‘beheld’), i.e., ‘The lake beheld, as it were, the faces of the Pramatha maidens’ since otherwise, the lake being insentient, cannot ‘really’ behold (JR).
[5]The cleverness in the poetic idea presented here arises from matching two similar objects – golden slabs and the buttocks that resemble blocks of gold (JR). 
[6]The silk-white garments, fluttering in the wind, appear like the frothy waves of the lake 
[7]JR remarks ‘As a matter of fact, the reflection (of a person in water) has the face above, which is why the poet imagines the celestial ladies as water nymphs emerging out’ ‘vastuvṛttena pratibimbita ūrdhvamukho bhavati, ataḥ sambhāvyate - jalamānuṣya udgacchantīti’). When one looks into water, one sees the reflected face close to the water’s surface, as if it were emerging out from within.
[8]The swans, according to the Sanskrit poetic convention, are said to be sexually inactive in the rainy season. The women described in this verse not only ‘truly’ subdue the pride of swans through their dainty gait but also, ‘by way of pun’, subdue their sexual passion because of being endowed with raining clouds/sweating breasts
[9]Varuna is the lord of waters. ‘Glances of the damsels fell sportively on the foamy mass’ is a roundabout way of saying ‘The eyes of the damsels delighted even at the sight of the foam’ (JR). 
[10]An auspicious conch is blown before a ritual bath. The frozen froth is the white conch, the noise of the waves, the conch’s sound, and the edge (lip) of the wave cluster, the mouth of the conch-blower. 
[11]Ladies shake off flowers and ornaments adorning their tresses before taking a plunge in water (JR). Since the poet identifies Aśoka buds with sparks of fire, it is appropriate to describe them as being afraid of water. 
[12]Kama’s flag is marked with a fish and flags are adorned with white flywhisks 
[13]The ornaments mentioned here refer to those which were removed by the celestial nymphs before bathing and placed on the bank. The ocean-like vastness of the lake is suggested through the description of the clouds that approach it to suck water.
[14]‘Harihetihūti’, a synonym of the Cakravāka bird, literally means ‘(the bird) that is called by the name (hūti) of Hari’s (cakra) weapon (heti)’. Magha has employed this synonym before Mankha in his Śiśupālavadha (‘haruhetihūti mithunaṃ patatoḥ, 9.15). 
[15]The lotus leaves, though dark green, have been compared to blue sapphires and the sky due to the Sanskrit poetic convention of considering green, black, and blue as identical (‘kṛṣṇanīlayoḥ kṛṣṇaharitayoḥ kṛṣṇaśyāmayoḥ --- ekatvena nibandhanaṃ ca kavisamayaḥ’, Kāvyamīmāṃsā, 15)
[16]The breeze is likened here to a libertine because of its action (JR).
[17]Reflections of objects (faces, in this case) on the surface of water disappear when it is disturbed. The poet’s fanciful imagination is based on this observation. 
[18]Long, curly tresses resemble spread-out chains. According to the Sanskrit poetic tradition, there are aquatic counterparts of animals like elephants, horses, etc. (‘sariti --- jalagajādayaḥ’, Kāvyakalpalatā, 1.5.65). See also verse 41 below for a mention of aquatic horses.
[19]The word for lake, ‘salilāśaya’, that is employed here, is in masculine gender, thereby lending propriety to the description of the lake as being thrilled by the touch of women (JR). 
[20]The nail-marks, made during love sports, are an indication of the lover’s greater attraction for the lady whose saffron paste was washed off with water. They were hidden earlier under the saffron paste but when the co-wife finally noticed them during the water sport, she was overcome with jealous anger and her face turned red. According to JR, since the angry-red face is the standard of comparison, it must be understood that it is redder even than the saffron-tinged water.
[21]Afraid of being caught, robbers hide in caves after stealing the wealth of powerful people (JR). 
[22]The moon stirs up the ocean. 
[23]According to the Sanskrit poetic convention, swans dislike turbid waters. The four ingredients in the Catuḥsamarasa paste are saffron, musk, camphor, and sandalwood (JR). Mankha alludes to this fragrant paste again in verse 13.5.
[24]Evening clouds are red in colour.
[25]Horses are decorated with flywhisks, wherefore one of their synonyms is ‘cāmarin’ (‘adorned with a cāmara flywhisk)
[26]One seeks refuge in someone else belonging to one’s own class, wherefore the lotuses approached the navel-lotus of Vishnu (JR).
[27]Novelty requires the uprooting of the old (JR). 
[28]The expression used for ‘self-similar’ is ‘ātmasodarī’, literally ‘one’s own sister’. One can freely remove one’s veil to behold one’s near and dear ones.
[29]The clear waters of the lake reflect every limb of the Lord, which is why it is described as having attained identity with him at the physical level (JR).
[30]‘Strange’ because of the submarine fire is known to be present only in the ocean. 
[31]The comparison is effected by matching the colours of foam and ash; golden lotuses and flames; and lotus leaves and the poison-tinged throat.  
[32]The boisterous laughter of the Lake owes to the joy of expansion 
[33]Mt. Mainaka, Parvati’s brother, lies submerged in the ocean’s waters and extends deep down into the nether world of the Nāgas (‘nāgavadhūpabhogyaṃ mainākamambhonidhibaddhasakhyam’, Kumārasambhava, 1.20). Mainaka is pitiable on account of his isolated existence under the ocean (JR).
[34]The strangeness stems from the fact that the lake attained grandeur, i.e., filled up with water, at the same time the peacock had fixed it eyes longingly on the clouds (i.e., in the expectation of rain). It is self-contradictory to say that the lake filled up with water when the peacock was still in the expectation of rain. This self-contradiction can be resolved by taking into consideration the alternate meanings of the words ‘nīlakaṇṭha’ and ‘payodhara’  
[35]The waves are akin to lady attendants who bathe the queen (JR).  
[36]This verse has undertones of Trika philosophy. The non-contextual meaning relates to the guru (Shiva) through whose grace his student-wife (Parvati) is able to immerse in the Absolute Consciousness (lake Manasa), the immersion leading to freedom from attachment, clarity of vision, and liberation from the cycle of birth and death and characterized by such bodily symptoms as goosebumps and shivering (JR) (‘ānanda udbhavaḥ kampo nidrā ghūrṇiśca pañcamī | evamāviṣṭayā śaktyā’, Mālinīvijayottaratantra, 11.35; romāñcastobhavikṣobha --- āveśaṃ parikīrtitam, Ūrmikāgama, 2.236). The Absolute Consciousness is also sometimes referred to as ‘Mahāhrada’ (‘Great Lake’) because of its purity, etc., for example, in the Śivasūtra ‘mahāhrado jagadvyāpī deśakālādyagocaraḥ (1.20.6), svacchatvādiguṇairyukte svānandabharite hrade (3.16.5).
[37]The surface of mirrors is polished by rubbing ash on it (JR). 


#========
Canto10


1. Thereafter, the Sun – his soft ray-feet enfeebled by the fatigue resulting from traversing the celestial path – approached the Setting Mountain that wished him a warm welcome through the deep murmuring sound of cascading waterfalls.[1]
2. Seemingly sprinkled with droplets of water that were scattering at that moment from streams of (melting) moonstones, the sunrays cooled down (literally ‘abandoned their plentiful heat’) as soon as they settled on the Setting Mountain.[2]
3. Goddess Shri left her home – the lotus – after securely bolting its petal-doors; it seemed she wanted to accompany the journeying Sun and be by the side of her father, the Ocean.[3]
4. When the Sun, satiated by drinking in the earth’s sweet waters, rested on the bed-like surface of the western mountain, the Lotuses gently massaged his ray-feet.[4]
5. The Lotus Ponds, clutching at the hem of their lover’s (i.e., the Sun’s) robe of lustre as if to stop him from leaving, were left helpless and hopeless as their tender lotus-hands started to contract.[5]
6. When the fierce-rayed sun was close by, every gem in the western ocean became unendurably hot and turned into a sunstone. 
7. Since the Lotus Plant placed her flower-hand before the Sun’s ray-hand at that time, I believe she took a parting promise from him that he will come back again.[6] 
8. It seemed that the sun’s orb – a ruby chair – wobbled because its ray-legs had worn out. And the Day, its lotus-eyes overcome with confusion, found no place to rest for a long time.[7]  
9. The sun’s orb fell from the sky into the ocean’s water all of a sudden.  And the water drops displaced by it put out the sunstone’s fiery blaze, or so it seemed.
10.  In the moon’s/physician’s absence, the sunstone’s fire/hunger was weakened, darkness swelled up, and eyes were blinded by darkness/cataract.[8]
11.  As the Evening, her starry pupils twinkling brightly, came of age, so did the Day, his deep redness/love intensifying, become excessively emaciated.[9]
12.  His ray-hands bruised by the sharp thorns of the lotuses which he had caressed throughout the day, the Sun couldn’t grab onto anything when Time pushed him down from the sky’s surface.[10]
13.  The approaching orb of the sun became a copper drum which the Ocean beat with wave-sticks to announce Time’s victory.[11]
14.  As it wobbled over the lovely sea – its hundreds of deep eddies suffused with the light of rubies - the sun’s orb, tinged red by the twilight, could barely be made out.[12]
15.  As the sun – a blazing conflagration in the forests on the Setting Mountain – approached the ocean, the latter – already suffering from the submarine fire within – was heated up on the outside too.[13]
16.  The star-studded darkness appeared like the slush, intermingled with gems, that surfaced up when the ocean was agitated as deep down as the nether world by the descending sun.
17.  The sun, all set to dive in, undoubtedly came face to face with the submarine fire, wherefore it (i.e., the sun) turned deep red, imbued, as it were, with the lustre streaming forth from the beaks of the Fire god’s parrot mounts.[14]
18.  The celestials most certainly worshipped the Sun in the evening, since the sky appeared like an offering of holy grains, thanks to the stars that were besmeared with the twilight’s crimson glow, as if with red sandalwood paste.[15]
19.  Is the sun’s orb a golden inkpot of the clerk called Time? For, when it fell down (into the ocean) on its face, the ink of darkness blackened the world.
20.  Wave after wave of blinding darkness - facilitator of women’s trysts with their lovers – looked like the glow of unsheathed swords brandished by the brave soldiers in Kama’s spirited battalion.[16]  
21.  As if it were the billowing smoke emitted by the dying fire of sunstones, the dense darkness flooded the eyes of Chakravakas with tears.[17]
22.  Amplified, as it were, by the surging smoke of the (hot) breaths, which Shiva’s serpentine bracelets emitted in the weariness of his robust evening dance, the darkness brought agony to separated lovers.
23.  The ocean rose high – filled up, as it were, by the waters streaming forth from the river on Shiva’s crest during his evening dance revelry as well as the waters from (melting) moonstones.
24.  Lamps – standing for fancy Tilaka designs of Lady Night, drawn with saffron – shattered the darkness with their light only to enrich it with the black soot which they gathered.[18]
25.  Very soon, numerous lamps – dazzling like cloudless lightning streaks that were out to burn the lonely wives of wayfarers - shone atop every mansion’s pleasure apartment.[19] 
26.  Never once did the trysting woman slip on the unbearably dark road because she had before her mind’s eye the brightly glowing moon-face of her sweet-heart.
27.  Strange indeed is Kama’s mystical lore, from whose standpoint the very darkness on the road suddenly became a hand-held lamp to help women meet their lovers (literally ‘lords of their hearts’).[20]
28.  The trysting women did not slip even in the pitch darkness on narrow roads filled with craters; they, therefore, must have surely travelled by the celestial route after boarding Kama’s aerial chariot.[21]
29.  The lotuses, long accustomed to the sun’s light, were apparently numbed by the cold nocturnal wind. Sighing through the buzz of the bees (trapped within), they held on, their bodies shrivelled.
30.  The darkness was indeed the dust raised by the army of Kama, keen on conquering the sky and the earth. This is the reason why all beings closed their eyes by pretending to be asleep due, as it were, to fear (i.e., the fear of being blinded by the dust).[22]
31.  As if burning within because of having swallowed the sun’s fiercely hot lustre, the darkness presently disguised itself as swarms of bees and rolled around in the interior of the night lilies that had burst open.[23] 
32.  Everywhere in the lake, the lotuses stopped being the liberal donors of nectar. And bit by bit, the night lilies transformed into freshly prepared dance floors for the bumblebees.[24] 
33.  When the light of the newly rising moon attained much brilliance, the East was soaked, as it were, in the glow of the pearls that were emitted by the agitated ocean.[25]
34.  Afraid of its immanent destruction, Darkness was reduced to bones, or so it seemed, in the guise of the boulders – whitened by the moon’s rays – atop the Rising Mountain.[26]
35.  The (luminous) Herbs finally got to hug their intensely red/passionate lord - the Moon – who, after a long time, was approaching them from the East, their upwardly radiating rays appearing like arms.[27] 
36.  There then occurred a brief moment of union and separation between moonlight and darkness – a moment that exhibited, as it were, a blend of sandalwood paste and musk in each and every direction.[28]
37.  It seemed the directions were littered with pearls and sapphires because the moon, having emerged from the ocean, adorned them with its light in some places but did not free them as yet from darkness in others.[29]
38.  At that time, the trysting women appeared to be clothed in white and black robes since the road they took was covered in moonlight mixed with dense darkness.
39.  The moon’s orb shone like a magic mirror on the sky’s surface – a mirror, on whose one side was reflected the combined beauty of every maiden’s face.[30]
40.  When the earth’s surface was partly pervaded by blinding darkness and partly by the moon’s rays, it seemed like the twin bodies of Vishnu and Shiva had mingled with one another as inseparably as (black) sesame and rice.[31] 
41.  Gradually, the moon’s orb, resembling a freshly formed ball of foam blown away by soft winds from a cascade in the eastern mountain, made a grand entry in the sky’s courtyard.[32]
42.  As soon as he rose, the deer-bannered Lord (i.e., the moon) split open the night lilies everywhere as if to quickly take back the lustre that he, in fear of the Sun, had placed within their buds at dawn. 
43.  At first, in the ocean, the moonlight appeared like liquid sandalwood paste serving the purpose of alleviating the fierce heat due to the submarine fire; on the Rising Mountain, it resembled the radiant glow of the tusks of wild elephants; and thereafter, it attained the semblance of a white lily ornament adorning the sky.[33]
44.  The moon was chewed through like a piece of sandalwood by the termite in the form of the dark deer mark clinging to its surface, wherefore the ten directions were covered in its powder, namely, the moonlight, which cleverly imitated the boisterous laughter of Kama, the nocturnal fiend who frightens wayfarers’ lonely wives.[34] 
45.  The Night verily pulled out Kama’s buried pot of treasure, masquerading as the moon’s orb, whereupon its coiled guardian black cobra, namely, the dark spot, stung the lovelorn women.[35]
46.  Bits of lotus stalks and moss dropped from the mouth of a male Chakravaka – weakened by the intense heat of separation - over the bank’s slopes making it appear as if he was strewing the path before him with them to keep himself cool. And he draped himself, or so it seemed, in a thick piece of wet cloth by disguising it as his shivering, dew-laden wings.[36]
47.  Desirous of ascending up to the sky/heaven quickly, the Moon - lord of the twice-born – sacrificed the Chakravakas in the fire of separation after performing a sprinkling ritual with the tips of his ray-hands, drenched in the water of melting moonstones[37]
48.  Long enduring the attack of the moon/king, who flaunted the splendour of his orb/sword, the masses of darkness, radiating forth a sword-like glow/keenly brandishing swords, met their end in his hands. Me believes they instantly took rebirth as the fumes of aloe-wood to enjoy the company of the celestial women’s wet tresses.[38]
49. That very moon, which had formerly attained the semblance of a vermillion seal stamped on Kama’s entire rich treasury due to its blessed association with the deep red of its rise, gradually acquired the similitude of an ivory earring fallen from the ear-tip of a celestial maiden in the unbridled excitement of her lovemaking.[39] 
50.  The moon’s orb – a rival to the loveliness of the divine damsel’s face, a teacher in the intricacies of graceful dance to the ocean’s mighty, shore-crashing waves, and an ally in brightness to the white conch that adorns the ear of the rutting elephant that is Kama – allayed the agony of each and every eye as soon as it ascended the sky.[40]  
51.  When the world was bathed in thick moonlight, beautiful women, decked in white ornaments, went out on a rendezvous to meet their lovers. It seemed as if a swarm of bees - attracted to the scent of the flowery arrows wielded by the Lord of love, who was residing in their hearts – followed them in the guise of their dark shadows.[41]
52.  Wrapping all living beings in the cloak of his nocturnal light, Lord Moon – crest jewel of Shiva – rendered the eyes of the womenfolk, who were separated from their lovers at that hour, the only refuge of darkness.[42] 
53.  When the moon had risen conspicuously, white lily buds - akin to tusks raised up by a herd of aquatic elephants - burst open all around in each and every lake, making the bees alighting on them appear like droplets scattering from streams of ichor gushing forth incessantly (from the temples of aquatic elephants).[43]  
54.  With the deep roar of waves standing for its trumpet, the elephant that is the ocean subdued the elephants of the directions and playfully butted against the mountain on the shore. Under the influence of its intense pride/musth this ocean-elephant, its limbs adorned with the ash of glittering moonlight, set out to forcefully invade the sky, standing for a forest of dark Tamala trees.[44]
55.  The glorious Moon – commentator of the great, mystical treatises on love, a supportive pal to doe-eyed lasses in fulfilling the solemn vow of meeting their lovers, and Rati’s handheld lamp – pierced through the very vitals of darkness with his form – characterized by sharp rays that jutted out – and advanced across the sky, transforming into an inn for thirsty Chakoras.[45] 
56.  Was it the reflection of the sky-dwelling moon’s circular orb that swayed tremulously in each and every pleasure pond? Or was it a water flour mill fashioned by Kama for pulverizing the love anger of impassioned women? The doubt persists.[46]
57.  The ground overlaid with moonstones rained water; the sky gleamed with the asterism of the seven great sages/assumed the appearance of a beautiful, dancing peacock; and the moon/boat glided freely through passion’s/watery territory. Thus did the night create a strange monsoon.[47]
58.  With his rays/hands rendered pale white in colour, seemingly because they came in contact with the ash left over by the dwindling fires of sunstones, the Moon rubbed away the dust of love anger from the mirror-like hearts of pretty-eyed damsels so they could readily reflect Love.[48]
59.  The wayfarers’ wives transformed the moon into the sun as if to remove the simmering sorrow of the female Chakravakas – fellow sufferers of the pain resulting from a lovelorn state - by painting it with the radiance of their eye corners, that had turned listless and red due to incessant crying, and put an end to its (i.e., the moon’s) natural coldness with a series of hot sighs.[49]
60.  Tormenting piqued ladies with their riotous bloom by spewing the plentiful venom of floral nectar, the blue lilies appeared like the expanded hoods of the black cobra that is Kama, springing up to devour the wafting evening winds .[50]
61.  Wanting to boil, as it were, the hearts of wayfarers’ wives, Kama placed the brand-new silver pan of the moon, its dark spot appearing like a greasy stain, on the sky’s stove, kept alight by the fire of the dense evening glow.[51]
________________
[1]The Rising and Setting mountains (called ‘Udaya’ and ‘Asta’ respectively) are fabled mountains from which the sun and moon are supposed to rise and behind which, to set.
[2]The sun sets when it reaches the Setting Mountain. The poet’s fancy is that the sun sets because his fiery rays are doused by droplets of water (scattering from the moonstones melting on the mountain) (JR)
[3]Married women are ever eager to visit their paternal homes if they can find someone who is willing to escort them (JR). Lakshmi was born during the churning of the ocean. According to the Sanskrit poetic convention, Lakshmi abandons lotuses in the evening.
[4]The sun is compared here to a well-to-do master who, after having his fill (drinking in the earth’s sweet waters), reclines on a bed (Setting Mountain’s surface) as servants (lotuses) massage his stretched-out feet (rays) (JR). 
[5]The non-contextual idea is about wives (lotuses) who try hard to stop their common husband (sun) from leaving on a journey but who are ultimately unsuccessful in doing so (JR). 
[6]Mankha uses the interesting word ‘dharmahasta’ for a ‘parting promise’. JR glosses it as ‘hastavācanika’. 
[7]The idea is that the sun’s orb is the chair on which the Day rests. Since the chair is now broken, the Day cannot find any other place to rest wherefore it expresses agitation with its lotus-eyes.
[8]JR provides an alternate reading for the first line: ‘viśvamāsta viruci pradoṣataḥ’ (‘The universe’s brightness/appetite was dimmed because of the evening/aggravation of humours). The moon is spoken of as the lord of herbs, ‘oṣadhipati’, a word that also means ‘physician’. 
[9]The non-contextual meaning pertains to a lover (day) who becomes emaciated in love, thinking constantly about a girl (evening) who has attained youth (JR) 
[10]The lotus stem is thorny. 
[11]The purport is that the waves rubbed against the orb of the approaching sun (JR). 
[12]The sun’s orb, tinged red by the evening, was lost among the hundreds of eddies which, like it, were also round in shape and red in colour (due to the glow of the rubies within) 
[13]The submarine fire heated up the ocean from inside and the sun from outside (JR). When the sunrays fall on the Setting Mountain, it seems as if its forests are on fire. 
[14]The sun turned red due to the fire. Objects turn red when heated by fire (JR). The Fire god is usually depicted as riding a ram. Descriptions of him riding a parrot are rather rare.
[15]The idea is this: The stars, besmeared with the twilight’s crimson glow resembled holy grains besmeared with red sandalwood paste. The entire sky, studded with such stars, appeared like an offering of holy grains made by the celestials to the Sun god. JR doesn’t explain what ‘arghakaṇa’ is. He takes the ‘vat’ (the suffix ‘vati’) in ‘arghakaṇavat’ as indicating similarity (‘like an arghakaṇa’), in which case the expression ‘nabho’rghakaṇavat ābabhau’ would mean ‘the sky appeared like an arghakaṇa’. The Kashmir poet Kalhana has, at one place in his Rājatararaṅgiṇī, compared tear drops to arghakaṇa (‘bāṣpabindumiṣādaujjhīddīrghānarghakaṇāniva’, 7.349). On the basis of this comparison, it seems better to take the stars themselves, rather than the sky, as resembling arghakaṇa, given it is the stars that appear like tear drops (which, in turn, resemble arghakaṇa). If that’s so, then the ‘vat’ in ‘arghakaṇa’ must be understood as the suffix ‘matup’ that indicates possession. In the light of this changed understanding, the expression ‘nabho’rghakaṇavat ābabhau’ can be translated as ‘the sky appeared to possess arghakaṇas (by way of the stars)’ and the verse can be interpreted as follows: The sky appears to be strewn with holy grains besmeared with sandal paste by way of the stars suffused with the red of twilight, indicating thereby that the celestials have rendered worship to the Sun god.
[16]In Sanskrit literature, swords are usually described as being black in colour. Darkness facilities the meeting of lovers. The idea is that the trysting ladies travel confidently even in the darkness because of the intensity of their love which makes them determined to meet their lovers at any cost. The confidence which love lends them is described by the poet in an abstruse way – It seems as if Kama, the god of love, has himself dispatched his soldiers to protect the women and the darkness that facilitates their tryst is but the lustre of the swords wielded by those soldiers. The swords are unsheathed because the soldiers are fully prepared to strike down any obstacle the women may encounter on the way.
[17]Smoke causes tears. 
[18]The flame of a lamp appears like a Tilaka mark drawn with saffron, both because of its tapering shape and orange-red colour. 
[19]The night is when the wayfarer’s wife suffers the pangs of separation acutely; the lamps lit at nightfall are therefore fancied as burning them.
[20]Whereas darkness blinds everyone else, it seemed to endow the women with a special vision. The purport is that darkness facilitated their rendezvous. In fact, it would have been difficult for them to meet their lovers in secret in the absence of darkness. 
[21]Slipping and falling due to the unevenness of a road is not a possibility when one is travelling by air  
[22]The idea is that all living beings closed their eyes at night not because they were asleep but due to the fear of being blinded by the dust of Kama’s army (JR).
[23]One rolls over on the ground after swallowing something very hot (JR). 
[24]The bumblebees abandoned the lotuses and entered the night lilies for making merry (JR). 
[25]The idea is that the ocean, agitated by the moonrise, emitted pearls from within and that the moonlight, illumining the East, is, in fact, the glow of those pearls.
[26]One may be reduced to skin and bones because of worrying. 
[27]The Moon is above and the Herbs below, wherefore the latter have to stretch their ray-arms up to hug him. Note that the Sanskrit words for the Moon (‘oṣadhipati’) and the Herbs (‘oṣadhis’) are in the masculine and feminine genders respectively. This, and the fact that the word ‘oṣadhipati’ means ‘lord/husband of the Herbs’ establishes a relationship of husband and his multiple wives between the moon and the herbs.
[28]Moonlight and darkness stand for sandalwood paste and musk respectively. JR describes ‘vigraha’, (‘separation’) as ‘the destruction of darkness by moonlight’. 
[29]Moonlight and darkness resemble heaps of pearls and sapphires respectively.   
[30]The idea is this: The moon, being the one standard of comparison for a beautiful face, is like a mirror in which the combined beauty of women’s faces is reflected. According to JR, it is a magical mirror because of simultaneously reflecting the facial beauty of all beautiful women. ‘One side’ refers to that part of the moon which is not marked with a dark spot since it is this part that can correspond to a beautiful face devoid of any blemish.
[31]Black sesame and rice correspond respectively to the bodies of Vishnu and Shiva.  
[32]The poet’s use of ‘soft’ and ‘gradually’ to qualify the winds and the moonrise respectively indicates it is spring time (JR)  
[33]The purport is that the moon made its appearance in the sky (JR).
[34]The verse has two intermingled ideas about the moonlight: It is the powder raining down from the piece of sandalwood that is the moon, chewed through by the termite that is the deer-mark on its surface (termites too cling to the surface of wood before chewing through it). It is also the boisterous laughter of the fiend that is Kama (JR).  
[35]It is believed that serpents guard hidden treasures. The idea in this verse is that Lady Night pulled out the treasure pot of Kama, disguised as the moon’s orb, whereupon the enraged black cobra guarding it in the form of the black spot stung anyone it chanced upon, which, in this context, happens to be the lovelorn ladies (JR). The purport is that the lovelorn ladies experienced great agony at the sight of the dark-spotted moon
[36]Though the lotus stalks and moss drop from the mouth of the male Cakravāka bird due to the fear of losing his mate in the moonlit night, the poet fancies that the bird, unable to bear the heat of separation, strewed his path with them as a means of keeping himself cool.  
[37]The ‘Parisamūhana’ ritual involves sprinkling water around fire (‘parisamūhanaṃ nāma ārdreṇa pāṇinā agniṃ paritaḥ sammārjanam’, Shrinivasadhvari’s commentary on Jaiminigṛhyasūtra). The sacrificing Brahmin, the fire, the water, and the sacrificial offering in this verse are, respectively, the moon, the fire of separation, the water oozing from moonstones, and the Cakravāka birds.   
[38]It is believed that those who die fighting in a battle (with the king/moon, in this case) reach heaven and enjoy the company of celestial women. The verse’s idea is based on this belief (JR). The fumes of aloe-wood are used to perfume the hair after a bath.
[39]The moon is deep red in colour when it rises, gradually turning white. 
[40]‘Agony’, here, implies impairment of vision due to darkness (JR). Conches are used for adorning elephants (Vide ‘divasakariṇaḥ --- śrotraśaṅkhaḥ śaśāṅkaḥ’, kaphphiṇābhyudaya, 15.10)
[41]The women decked themselves in white ornaments to conceal their presence in bright moonlight (JR).
[42]The idea is that the darkness, dismissed from elsewhere by the moon, found its refuge in the eyes of lovelorn women who were blinded by sorrow (JR). 
[43]According to Sanskrit poetic convention, elephant tusks burst open in moonlight (JR). The idea of the verse is that the white lily buds appeared like the tusks of aquatic elephants and the bees alighting on them like droplets of ichor. 
[44]The ocean’s tide rose as far as the sky in the moonlight. Designs drawn with ash are used for adorning elephants (Vide ‘bhakticchedairiva viracitāṃ bhūtimaṅge gajasya’, Meghadūta, 19)
[45]The moon is described as piercing the darkness because of his sharp rays that jut out. 
[46]Pānīyagharaṭṭa is āb-e-gratte, Kashmira’s traditional water flour mill (graṭa=gharaṭṭa, A Dictionary of the Kashmīrī Language, p. 304).  
[47]Monsoon is characterized by rain, dancing peacocks, and boats gliding through water. The strangeness of the monsoon is because of its occurrence in spring, a paradox that must be resolved through pun.  
[48]Mirrors are polished with ash (JR).  
[49]By making the moon red-hot through their reddened eyes and hot sighs, the ladies give a semblance of the sun to the moon, thereby allaying the Cakravāka’s sorrow, which surfaces at   
[50]Serpents, in the Sanskrit literary tradition, are known to subsist on air. 
[51]The purport of the verse is that the lovelorn wives of wayfarers suffered at the sight of the moon (JR). 


#========
Canto11


1. As soon as it rose up in the sky, the moon’s orb – resembling Kama’s spherical missile, fastened to the shaft in the form of an extended ray – shattered the anger of women.[1]
2. The moon’s orb, whose digit had (previously) appeared like the swinging bait of the hunter that is the fish-bannered Kama, gradually became the (well-rounded) wheel of love’s chariot.[2]
3. Love’s flower-arrowed deity - accompanied by an endless retinue and residing, strangely enough, in the moon’s orb/lunar mandala – employed the gesture of dissolution against piqued ladies.[3]
4. The sloping breasts of helpless, lovelorn women reflected the moon from afar and appeared like ivory lids placed over their hearts by Kama who took them (i.e., the hearts) for baking furnaces.[4] 
5. The moon caused warm tears to well up in the eyes of passionate ladies just as it caused the ocean’s warm waters to well up. Surprisingly, though, Kama’s arms began to itch when he was bathed in them (i.e., the warm tears).[5]
6. The moon’s elongated rays, standing for spiritual masters, undertook the vow of demolishing every bit of (the wayfarers’) confidence. Famed for adorning/worshipping the (lunar) orb/mandala designs, they covered the eyes of wayfarer youths with a veil of tears.[6] 
7. The wives of travellers beheld the moon’s orb – its centre distinguished by a dark spot – as if it were the unlatched crystalline door through which they could ascend up to the city of Death. 
8. Carrying a mass of pollen from blooming night lilies as if it were the ash scattered from the wayfarers’ hearts – burned down in the fire of separation – the wind blew roughly on disgruntled women.
9. The moon’s orb looked like one of Lady Night’s rounded breasts, the hare mark standing for its dark nipple. Curiously though, it (i.e., the breast) squeezed/tormented lovers hard with the tips of the hands/rays.[7]
10.  At that time, when women/prince Rama, crumbling under the burden of separation, suffered at the sight of the moonlight/sword Chandrahasa, the ocean trembled as if when bound by a bridge.[8]
11.  Did Goddess Fortune reside in the night lilies after the lotuses shut their petals at that hour? How else did the bees alighting on them (i.e., the night lilies) assume the semblance of drops of ichor oozing from the elephants that are her vehicles?[9] 
12.  The Moon – chief warrior in Kama’s army – split open the night lilies with his rays as if he were practising how to split open the hearts of lovelorn women.
13.  “Through his reflection in your toenails, the moon tightly hugs your feet due, as it were, to the close friendship fostered by the common task of belittling the lotus’s charm.[10]
14.  Darling! Due to the reflection of the moon’s orb in your toenails, it seems as though your feet are friends with a flock of swans, summoned by the restlessly noisy anklets.
15.  Youthful maiden! Mirrored on the sloping surface of your heavy buttock, the moon’s orb takes on the semblance of a silver footstool for Emperor Kama, who stays close at hand.
16.  Thanks to the full moon’s orb reflected on your midriff, you look like Vishnu in the female disguise, his navel lotus springing up adamantly in spite of being hidden.
17.  Foremost among women! The reflection of the moon’s orb disintegrates into numerous fragments when it falls on the wavy folds of your abdomen, taking the shape of bejewelled bells that emerge magically and effortlessly on your girdle band.
18.  Dazzling Damsel! Due, as if, to their partiality towards the self-similar Chakravakas, your twin breasts strike the moon, reflected in their vicinity, through the swaying movements of the tremulous pearl-necklace (adorning them).[11] 
19.  Sweet-throated lady! Your neck gleams with the moon’s reflection that appears like Vishnu’s handheld conch, forced by it (i.e., the neck) into slavery due to the anger resulting from its beauty getting stolen (by the conch).[12] 
20.  Simple girl! The moon’s full-grown orb - reflected close to your sprout-like lips – successfully creates an impression of pretty smiles collected into a heap day after day.[13] 
21.  Maiden with stooping limbs! The moon’s full orb, mirrored on your round cheek, reiterates the stout pearl earring’s presence.
22.  It looks like the Moon, reflected close to your ear, is desirous of instructing you in some mysterious secret which he learnt from the mouth of Kama, the family preceptor of youthful ladies.[14]
23.  Lotus-eyed damsel! An unbroken row of the moon’s reflected images on your forehead’s flat surface appears like a turban fastened by Kama to indicate your absolute sovereignty over the entire realm of youthful ladies.”[15]
24.  In this manner, a certain lover – subservient to his passion – sang paeans in praise of women with elongated eyes the size of a handful, who attained matchless splendour from the moon’s reflection falling on their every limb.[16] 
25.  “Do not cover your body, that is as pale as a reed stalk, with the blue garment. Let the cloudy stain that cleverly conceals the moon’s orb melt away.[17]
26.   The pair of your eyes has once and for all denied deer their pride. Presently, let your pretty cheek too follow suit and deny deer their pride/musk.[18] 
27.  Discard the chaplet of blue lotus petals – singularly shameless in committing the sin of forcefully grabbing your hair – because these petals, that are the sole rivals of your eyes, will betray you at some opportune moment.[19]
28.  Deprive now your lofty breasts of the elaborate creeper designs drawn with black aloe paste – designs that are bound to create a new trouble by inviting noisy bees.[20]
29.  May the sapphire necklace step down from its position atop your curvaceous, closely set breasts. For, the Moon, deeming the necklace to be a patch of darkness, seizes it by its tuft of (dark blue) lustre with his rays/hands.  
30.  Lady with faultless limbs! Discard this deep blue attire of yours since the rising moon creates an obstacle to women who tryst in the darkness.
31. Moon-faced maiden! On second thought, bedeck your limbs in a dark blue attire as it pleases you. For, the advent of the moonlight that is your dazzlingly dense sportive smile shall itself serve to conceal it (i.e., the dark attire).”
32.  Thus did the female confidants of women trysting in the twilight advise them forthwith when the Moon cleverly pulled away Lady Night’s black upper garment of darkness.[21] 
33.  “Bracelets fashioned from lotus filaments, pearl necklaces, and the paste of sandalwood will delight you to no end during the moonlight tryst because they naturally possess the additional attribute of allaying love’s heat waves.[22]
34.  Dressed in pure white finery for the moonlight tryst, you appear like the presiding deity of the milky ocean; more so, because you are stirred by the advent of the moon and cause flurried activity in the fish-bannered Kama/oceanic expanse.
35.  Moon-faced beauty! Quickly rub the sticky paste of sandalwood on all your limbs so Kama cannot lift his feet off them as he strolls around with Rati.[23] 
36.  Why in vain do you adorn your curls in with the chaplet of Shephalika buds since the moon, reflected on your broad forehead, itself accomplishes that task with ease?[24] 
37.  Lady with tremulous pupils! Bedeck your feet with gem-studded anklets during the moonlight tryst because a flock of sportive swans, summoned by the concert of their sweet jingling sounds, can serve to hide your presence.[25]
38.  Gliding in the heart/Manasa lake of your lover, you – Kama’s sportive female swan – started your journey with slow, measured steps. Why do you now suddenly take off from the ground as it were, the tip of your silken robe fluttering like a feather?
39.  In vain have you adorned your person with moonstones while venturing out excitedly on a moonlight rendezvous, for your feet falter on the road, made wet by the water that oozes forth when the moon’s rays melt them.
40.  Maiden with elongated eyes! Just take care of this special all-white attire without worrying about your lover at present since the stream of sweat resulting from your worry might perchance cause this camphor-rich cosmetic application to melt away”.
41.  Thus did the attendants of trysting women, who were clad in white robes, converse with them on the streets when the beloved husband of Daksha’s daughters (i.e., the Moon) had a rendezvous with Lady Night, herself covered in the white robe of moonlight.[26]
42.  “The Moon/foremost of Brahmins, pleased by the rich Beauty of your face – beauty that is always favourably disposed towards him (by way of imitating his beauty)/honours him continuously with gifts – now places the tip of his ray/hand over your head and pronounces as it were this blessing – “May you become the crest jewel of the entire womenfolk”.[27]
43.  With rays that resemble pens soaked in the saffron ink of the twilight’s residual red glow, methinks the Moon wants to engrave some divine, blessed letters – harbingers of exceptional attractiveness and feminine grace - on your forehead.[28]
44.  Vainly do the moon’s rays, shimmering like waves of camphor dust, fall on your curvaceous lips because your smiles that are the close buddies of Kama’s bright fame hide their presence.
45.  The tips of moon rays cluster around your lower lip that robs young corals of their pride. Flushed with its lustre, they seem to have once again attained the redness that characterized them at moonrise.
46.  Simple girl! The moon’s round orb stretches its ray-hands forward from afar and your round breast launches an attack with the hand-like beams of its swinging pearl necklace. Are the two engaged in a duel?
47.  Your midriff, beautified by the billowing rays of the moon that fall on it, seems to emit, as it were, waves of the pure white fame got by defeating the weapon Vajra with its slenderness.[29] 
48.  Fawn-eyed lady! A stream of moonlight, akin to the celestial river Ganga, flows down rapidly into your deep navel. Herein, let it create a Prayaga confluence along with the Yamuna that is the thin line of hair running across your belly.[30]
49.  Maiden with thighs that resemble plantain stalks! A thick mass of moonlight touches your thighs from afar. In its overarching presence, may the latter surpass the plantain trees not just by their beauty but also by their coolness.[31]   
50.  Roving-eyed damsel! By coming in contact with your lac-dyed feet, let these rays of the moon build a bond of blissful friendship, unknown to them in their entire lives, with freshly bloomed lotuses”.[32]
51.  Thus did the lovers, seated on bejewelled chairs, employ words filled with flattery to describe their women - standing on the terrace of lofty mansions, their every limb awash with the moon’s bright beams.[33]
52.  “Dear friend! Fetch a hand-held lamp before me as this ball of white darkness that goes by the name of moon has suddenly blocked my vision.[34]  
53.  Alas! The moon flaunts darkness, masquerading as the black spot, in his belly. And he blinds people like us with bits of that darkness, or so it seems, when we are bereft of our partners who are like our lamps.
54.  The world condemns the Kalakuta poison, after drinking which Shiva continues to defy both old age and death, but is full of praise for the Moon, who is death incarnate to the lovelorn women. Rare indeed is wisdom![35]  
55.  O Moon, creator of the night! It befits you, and sadly so, to act cruelly towards lovelorn beings since you sit forever on the head of Hara, destroyer of the universe.
56.  Nectar-rayed moon! Even now you carry the poison Kalakuta, disguised as your black spot, so you can eliminate us. Seemingly afraid of that poison, Rahu spits you out as soon as he swallows you in.[36]
57.  Maker of the night! Your rays were undoubtedly fashioned from the fresh fragments of a Ketaka blossom, wherefore they possess a brilliant white hue and pierce our bodies as if with thorns.[37]
58.  It surely was the submarine fire’s ball of ash that came out of the ocean in the form of the moon, which is why no amount of water streaming forth from the eyes of lovelorn women seems to suffice it.[38]  
59.  King of the night! Which soft-limbed person can endure your rays?  For, even moonstones melt instantly with their touch.[39]
60.  My partner was correct when he called my face a lotus in his secret, flattery-filled conversations. That is why it suffers pain beyond words by coming in contact with the moon’s rays.[40]
61.  Lord Vishnu! Show us some mercy by endowing Rahu with a body once more so the moon, having descended into the deep depths of his belly, will no longer torment us.” [41]
62.  In this way, the lovelorn women rebuked the moon in the most profoundly poignant words. And by drenching their silk robes in tears, they seemed to cool their burning bodies with copious water.[42]
63.  “Overcome with anger, the triple-eyed Shiva destroyed Kama’s body, but to no avail, since you, his nectar-rayed friend, have made him ageless and immortal once again.[43]
64.  Cool-rayed Moon! Your orb is truly Kama’s gem of union. Thanks to its magical power, the separation of women from their lovers ends all of a sudden. [44]
65.  Hare-marked Moon! Love’s ally! Shiva shares half of his body with his wife Parvati and never undergoes separation from her.  This, I believe, is due to the supernatural power that you, seated on his crest, command.[45]
66.  O Moon! You freely transform into a lamp of romantic union when trysting women, having made their partner’s arm a pillow, sleep on the rendezvous’ dusty ground. 
67.  Deer-marked Moon! Bringing close the bodies of an amorous pair like they were the two wings of a door, you latch them together in a tight embrace so Love’s secret treasure lies very safe within.
68.  Nectar-rayed Moon! You stand first and foremost among the blessed ones since Lilies smile and Lotuses sleep after a long time when you appear before them.[46]
69.  Night’s paramour! Is it strange that you bring a joyful smile on the faces of pretty-eyed ladies – faces that are your allies in appearance? It is well known that you are, by your very nature, favourably disposed even towards the limbless Kama. 
70.  O Moon! You make women shed tears of joy when they are united with their lovers, but what is so special about this, given you yourself are Atri’s first teardrop of ecstasy?[47] 
71.  Deer-bannered Moon! The very moment you rise, you make the glances of amorous women extend playfully till their ears due, as it were, to the teaching imparted by the deer that rests on your lap.[48] 
72.  Dear Moon! When, having transcended all the constellations/huge heaps of gold and such other objects one after another, you attain fullness and enrich love beyond measure, youthful couples no longer dare to engage in mutual love quarrel/add anymore weights.”[49]
73.  Not knowing the heat of painful suffering as their lovers rested like pearl necklaces upon their breasts, the lanky ladies thus praised the moon in words that were infused with liveliness by the elixir of joyous affection.[50] 
74.  Proudly flaunting the ornamental flywhisk that is the moon’s orb, passion’s elephant readily uprooted the hearts of young men like they were a bunch of lotuses as the white lilies in partial bloom, bees buzzing inside, took on the semblance of noisy silver bells adorning it.[51] 
75.  The sky was overspread with giant stars that appropriated the glory of flowers rained down by an assembly of gods, who rejoiced at the bowmanship of Kama as he eagerly practiced the hero’s vow – a vow that is impossible to achieve in the three worlds. And by way of the clustering moon rays, it (i.e., the sky) sported a thick canopy of flowers put forth by the wish-yielding tree called love.[52] 
________________
[1]The ‘Vajragulaka’, mentioned in this verse, is some kind of weapon (JR) 
[2]The use of ‘Jhaṣāṅka’ (‘Fish-bannered’) for Kama is purposeful and complements the idea of the moon as a fish-catching bait. The moon, which was partially visible before, and therefore resembled a bait, gradually climbed up the sky and was seen in its entirety, taking on the appearance of a chariot wheel.
[3]In this verse, Kama is compared to an Āgama deity who dwells in the Mandala (symbolic design drawn with red arsenic, etc.) that is the moon’s orb. Like any other principal deity, he is accompanied by a large retinue (of other deities, which, in this case, includes Vasanta, Rati, etc.). When invoked in the moon’s Mandala, the deity that is Kama brings about the annihilation of lovelorn women. Mankha describes this as strange because, according to the Āgama texts, a deity is said to occupy the sun’s, and not the moon’s, Mandala to bring about annihilation (JR). 
[4] Puṭapāka is a process of preparing certain medicines in which the ingredients are baked in closed containers. The adjective ‘ivory’ has been incorporated in the translation based on the variant reading ‘dantapidhāna’ for ‘dattapidhāna’, mentioned by JR in his commentary and also because the brilliant reflection of the moon would indeed appear like an ivory lid. The comparison of the hearts to baking furnaces suggests that the sorrow of lovelornliness is akin to fire.  
[5]Bathing in warm water usually relieves an itch. That it did the opposite in the case of Kama is surprising.   
[6]Spiritual masters observe vows, worship Mandalas, and blindfold their disciples with a piece of cloth (while initiating them into a mantra) (JR). The word pāda, in plural, is often added to the names of people (such as spiritual masters, as in Abhinavagupta-pādāḥ) to express veneration.  
[7]It is the amourous lovers who squeeze the breasts of women hard with the tips of their hands. That the breast-like orb of the moon tormented the lovers with the tips of its ray-hands is surprising (JR)
[8]The verse brings together two situations, involving lovelorn women (contextual) and the lovelorn prince Rama (non-contextual), that are both characterized by the ocean’s agitation, caused respectively by the moonrise and the building of the stone bridge. Candrahāsa is Ravana’s sword. 
[9]Lakshmi abandons lotuses at night. The poet imagines that she must have made the lilies her abode because the bees swarming around them appear like drops of ichor dripping from the temples of the elephants that are her vehicles (JR).
[10]The maiden’s feet and the moon share a mutual friendship owing to their common agenda of belittling the lotuses
[11]Breasts are frequently compared to Cakravākas. 
[12]A beautiful neck is often compared to a conch. The neck of the maiden described here is so exceptionally beautiful that no ordinary conch can come anywhere close to it, wherefore the poet qualifies the conch as belonging to Vishnu. The idea is that her neck has vanquished even Vishnu’s handheld conch by its beauty. The reflection of the moon on her neck is in fact the defeated conch come to serve her neck. 
[13]Smiles are white in colour according to the Sanskrit poetic convention. 
[14]One whispers a secret by coming close to another person’s ear (JR). 
[15]A turban is tied around the head of a sovereign ruler. 
[16]‘Prasṛtidṛśām’ = ‘nikubjapāṇidṛṣṭīnām’ (JR) = ‘with eyes that approximate the palm of the hollowed hand’. Verses 13 to 24 form one Kulaka unit.
[17]From verse 25 till verse 30, women going out on a secret rendezvous are advised by their female confidants to desist from wearing anything dark on their bodies since the bright moonlight, through contrast, will expose them if they do so. The ‘cloudy stain’ and the ‘moon’s orb’ in the second half of this verse are metaphors, respectively, for the ‘blue garment’ and the ‘pale body’ that are mentioned in the first half. 
[18]Deer are known for their elongated eyes. 
[19]The blue lotuses could give her presence away because of their dark colour and the hum of bees that are attracted to their fragrance (JR). 
[20]The aloe paste already reveals her presence by darkening her breasts. In addition to this, it also attracts noisy bees, thereby increasing the likelihood of her being spotted (JR). 
[21]Since Lady Night has herself forsaken the dark robe of darkness, the trysting ladies must also follow suit. Verses 25 to 32 constitute a Kulaka. 
[22] The bracelets fashioned from lotus filaments, pearl necklaces, and sandalwood paste serve the twin purpose of camouflaging her presence in the moonlight and allaying the heat of love.
[23]The purport is that Kama resides in her limbs (JR). 
[24]The moon’s reflection appears like a chaplet of Śephālikā flowers over her forehead. Śephālikā is a variety of jasmine that flowers at night  
[25]The white swans can hide her presence in the moonlight by surrounding her and by masking the sound of her anklets with their cry (JR)
[26]Verses 33 to 41 form a Kulaka. The appropriateness of wearing white robes while going out on a moonlight tryst is highlighted by the description of Lady Night herself being clad in the white robe of moonlight during her tryst with the Moon. The epithet ‘Dākṣāyaṇīpriyatama’ (‘Beloved of the Stars’) is significant because it provides a reason for why Lady Night must hide her presence: She must do so to avoid being found out by the Stars, who are her co-wives. Furthermore, the word ‘Dākṣāyaṇī’ (‘Daughters of Daksha’) that is used for the Stars is also pregnant with suggestion. Lady Night must be doubly careful lest the Stars complain to their father if she is found out. Finally, ‘Dākṣāyaṇīpriyatama’ also means Shiva, the beloved of Devi, who was Daksha’s daughter in a former birth. Dressed in the white robe of moonlight, Lady Night approached Shiva. 
[27]Brahmins pronounce blessings by placing their hand on the heads of those who propitiate them with gifts (JR).
[28]The purport is that the moonrise amplified the attractiveness (saubhāgya) and feminine grace (vibhrama) of the lady described in this verse (JR).  
[29]Indra’s Vajra weapon is slender in the middle (JR).  
[30]The Ganga meets the Yamuna at Prayāga. Romāvalī is a thin line of hair running across the belly and is a sign of beauty.
[31]The idea is that the maiden’s thighs, bathed in the moonlight, will surpass plantain stalks not just by their appearance but also their coolness (JR).  
[32]A roundabout way of saying that her feet resemble lotus. 
[33]Verses 42 to 51 form a Kulaka set (JR).
[34]To paraphrase, ‘This is not the moon, but a ball of white darkness since it obstructs my vision’ (JR). 
[35]The purport is that the moon is deadlier than swallowing the Kālakūṭa poison (JR).
[36]Rāhu is believed to swallow the moon and then quickly release it during the lunar eclipse. 
[37]The Ketaka blossom is both brilliantly white in colour and thorny. The word ‘Sudhākara’ (‘of ambrosial rays’), used for the moon, is suggestive: Though its rays are ambrosial, the moon hides a deadly venom, disguised as the black spot, amidst those rays. Rāhu swallows the moon in the hope of tasting the ambrosia only to spit it out after realizing the lurking presence of the Kālakūṭa poison therein.
[38]No amount of water suffices (to dissolve) ash (JR). 
[39]If stones too can melt with the touch of the moon’s rays, how could a soft-limbed person endure them? 
[40]Moon rays are inimical to lotuses. 
[41]Vishnu cut off Rāhu’s head with his discus when he tried to consume ambrosia by hiding amidst the gods. Because he had already drunk a portion of the ambrosia, his cut-off head became immortal. Furthermore, his trunk that fell on the ground became immortal too. (‘viṣṇuḥ pītāmṛtaṃ daityaṃ cakreṇodyamya tacchiraḥ | ciccheda tarasā vatsa tacchirastvamṛtaṃ tvabhūt || śiromātravihīnaṃ yaddehaṃ tadapatadbhuvi | dehaṃ tadamṛtaspṛṣṭaṃ patitaṃ dakṣiṇe taṭe || gautamyā muniśārdūla kampayadvasudhātalam | dehaṃ cāpyamaraṃ putra tadadbhutamivābhavat ||’, Brahmapurāṇa, 106.30-32). Since Rāhu is left with a mouth, he can swallow the moon but, being unable to digest it, must spit it out soon. However, if his body is fitted back to his head, he can digest the moon too.  
[42]Verses 52 to 62 form a Kulaka.  
[43]Shiva lacked foresight because of his anger (JR). 
[44]The Saṅgamanīya gem is a fabled gem that reunites separated lovers. Kalidasa alludes to it in the play Vikramorvaśīya
[45]The greeting ‘Śṛṅgārabandho’ (‘Love’s ally’) is appropriate for the context.
[46]When their paramour arrives, some ladies smile and some others close their eyes in joy (JR). 
[47]The Moon was born from the eye of Sage Atri (‘atrinetrasamitpannaścandramāḥ’, Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa, 3.35.53)
[48]The purport is that the moonrise stimulates amorous behaviours, such as sidelong glances, in women.
[49]The moon traverses through various constellations before attaining fullness. The full moon, in turn, enriches love to such an extent that couples no longer engage in love quarrels. The poetic idea, effected through pun, is this: Each constellation is akin to some measure of gold against which the moon is weighed. The moon that has traversed through all the constellations and attained fullness corresponds to a ‘heavy’ moon that has been previously weighed against different measures of gold. Since the moon and romantic love go hand in hand, a ‘heavy’ full moon adds so much value to love that the latter too grows beyond measure, so much so that love anger/piling of measuring weights is rendered meaningless.  
[50]Verses 63 to 73 form a Kulaka
[51]Elephants are adorned with white flywhisks and bells 
[52]The clusters of moon rays appeared like bunches of flowers put forth by the tree of love (JR). 


#========
Canto12


1. The plantain leaf, worn as a fancy armour over his (i.e., Kama’s) body, did not stand out prominently, thanks to a state of non-difference between the two (i.e., the leaf and Kama’s body) on account of their (shared) dark green hue.[1] 
2. Resembling a wave of passion’s redness – transmitted (to him) by residing in the heart of lovers - a warrior’s band, fashioned from clusters of Patala blossoms, adorned his forehead.
3. Encircled by a protective strap, created by Spring from fully-blown Champaka flowers, his wrist seemed to sport a fancy golden bracelet although the bracelet (that previously adorned it) had been taken off.
4. Tinged red by a multitude of Ashoka blossoms (decorating it), the bow which he grasped in his lotus-hand appeared to be imprinted all over with the red lips of Universal Victory as she planted her kisses on it.  
5. His bow, that unsettles all the three worlds, was seemingly darkened by the kohl-laden teardrops of lovelorn ladies masquerading as the young bees adhering to the margin of its creeper-like (floral) string.
6. A quiver, its hollow filled with floral missiles, adorned his back. And amidst the swarm of bumblebees captivated by its fragrance, his loosely flowing (dark and curly) mane was lost to view.[2]
7. The fast-blowing wind from Simhala put on the semblance of his chariot, fitted, as it were, with wheels in the front through the circles of bees summoned by its fragrance.
8. The full moon’s orb acted as Kama’s shady parasol though, surprisingly, it heated up the hearts of the wayfarer’s lotus-faced beloved.[3]
9. The cuckoo, immensely pleased by Kama’s gift of the pollen grains that his arrows – the mango blossoms – had amassed, transformed into a bard, singing sweet tunes before him in unbroken succession.[4]
10. Preventing the entry of unrelenting Pique into the mansion of every maiden’s heart, the (cuckoo’s) proud Panchama/fifth Note was reckoned first among all gatekeepers.[5]
11. A fish quickly ascended his lofty banner of its own accord, (a fish) that makes rivers of tears flow from the eyes of lovelorn women, desirous, as it were, of dwelling in them (i.e., the rivers of tears).[6]
12. In this way, Kama – Rati’s consort – proceeded to eagerly wed the universe’s Lady Victory, the (dark) radiance emanating from the corner of his (jealous) wife’s eye adding a second coat of mail over and above what he had worn.[7]
13. “Dear! Why do you take so much effort to torture lovelorn ladies? Pray tell me where do they beat the hero’s drum of renown for killing helpless women.
14. Wearing an armour, why do you set out to conquer the three worlds all by yourself when it (i.e., the conquest of the three worlds) can be singlehandedly accomplished even by the Spring or the Moon - your foot soldiers?
15. O Lord! Rama earned a lot of disrepute for having killed even a single woman. How then can your fame increase by slaughtering the womenfolk of the triple world?[8]
16. Wielding a bow with an arrow fixed upon it, you attempt to shatter the confidence of self-controlled ascetics. What greater purpose, other than the destruction of your own body, do you wish to achieve by doing so?[9]
17. How foolishly adamant you are! Though you were lapped by the sharp flames of Shiva’s ocular fire, your arms itch without stop even to this day.[10]
18. Smara! Enough of senselessly fiddling around with your bow so you can defeat the sages, who are rich in austerities. I cannot endure the unsettling pangs of widowhood for a second time in the future.[11]
19. Stop trying to intimidate the yogis, for neither their kindness nor their anger ever fails to bear fruit. This enterprise – decidedly a waste of energy – is bound to produce a disastrous result.
20. Women indeed are your only absolute means for conquering the triad of worlds. How then will you achieve victory if you start off by killing those very women for no fault of theirs?[12]
21. Lord! Given to accumulating floral arrows/satisfying your godly supplicants, you clearly did abandon violence/your own body. Even so, what makes you persist stubbornly in harming others without purpose?[13]
22. Smara! You continue to suffer the effects of Brahma’s curse even now. Yet, and strangely enough, why do you go about attracting the curses of other sages too?[14] 
23. Wrongly do you assume thus - “How can someone, hit by (mere) flowers, feel any pain?”. For, in front of these flowers – beyond the reach of (remedial) gems and magical charms – (even) poison transforms into the nectar of immortality.”[15]  
24. In this way, Rati tried to stop Kama with her eloquent speech – expressing prudence as well as concern. But he, on his part, just walked away in pride, hurriedly freeing the hem of his robe from her hand.[16] 
25. “Rivers of tears – their course determined by love/the sea – characterize her face. Reflected in their large pools, her confidantes take on the appearance of water nymphs.”
26. “A flicker of hope that you shall arrive becomes the medicine to treat the oedematous expansion of her nights – brought about by the unhealthy regimen, namely, lovelornliness, and occurring all the more even in the spring season.”[17] 
27. “Bumblebees that resemble Halahala’s poisonous seeds sown by Kama gather in front of her. And she – possessed of teary channels – experiences pain ploughing through her person because of them.”[18]
28. “She flaunts a pearly white necklace of lotus filaments over her bosom, adorning as it were her fragile frame with a sacred thread to attain invincibility in the hands of Kama.”[19] 
29. “Because of her continuous contemplative thoughts (about you, her lover), she believes that the Directions are hugged by your forms (i.e., she sees you everywhere); and therefore, in her innocence, repeatedly casts on them (i.e., the Directions) glances that are marred by envy.”[20]
30. “Through her form that is reflected every night on polished moonstone floors, she seems intent on entering the nether world, fearing the touch of the moon’s spreading light.” 
31. “A multitude of lotus leaves, placed over the lovelorn lady’s breasts – marked by circles of kohl-streaked teardrops splashing on them – is spotted somehow, only because it is shaken by her sighing breaths.”[21] 
32. “Rolling restlessly from side to side, she exhibits a line of kohl-stained teardrops in the vicinity of her ears as if it were the (dark-hued) riverine sister (i.e., Yamuna) of the Sun-born Yama, dispatched in advance by the latter for conveying to her his message (of her impending death).”[22]
33. “With the kohl-laden teardrops that land on the large plantain leaves placed over the tip of her breasts, she seems to issue, by Kama’s orders, freeway tickets to her vital breaths as they set out on their long journey (to the world hereafter).”[23]
34. “What more need be said? If you will take a few hurried steps and approach her even now, your glorious name may still remain unsullied by the sprout of infamy’s stain.”[24] 
35. Having momentarily sipped with their ears these droplets of words - emanating from the mouths of the female messengers – youthful lovers placed one hurried step after another so their sweethearts could (finally get a chance to) sip them in with their eyes.[25]
36. The beloved wives of gods – who move around in aerial chariots – were effortlessly furnished with pearl necklaces as the (ocean’s) sky-kissing waves swiftly scattered clusters of pristine pearls over their breasts.
37. As the pearls that were strewn by the (ocean’s) high-rising waves embraced the Moon, Daksha’s (starry) daughters, suspecting he was having an affair with another set of Stars, grew angry.[26]
38. Even as the (ocean’s) lofty waves reached their doorstep by chance, the (seven, starry) divine sages did not touch the waters for sipping, afraid that a portion of the wine distilled from those waters (during the churning of the ambrosia) may perchance still linger in them.[27]  
39. As the fishes and the Makaras leaping up from a circle of wild waves crowded the sky, the eyes of astrologers could scarcely comprehend the movement of constellations.[28] 
40. Freshly smeared with the plentiful rays of rubies scattering everywhere in the sky above, even Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter decidedly created a false impression in everyone’s mind that they were Mars.[29]  
41. Abandoning even the Santanaka creepers, heaven’s bees alighted on the ocean’s waves that suffused the sky with the sweet fragrance of the navel lotus of Lord Vishnu, who reclines in their midst.[30]
42. As the Ocean – lord of rivers/armies – marched across the celestial path, conches – their interiors made noisy by the windy tide – blared forth at the very outset to herald good luck, or so it seemed.[31]
43. The (surging) columns of waves, their crests interwoven with the flames of the submarine fire, appeared like blazing lampstands placed beside the pleasure couch of Vishnu as he lies in repose.
44. The waves that rose majestically were so endowed with qualities such as stoutness and loftiness that the aquatic elephants mistook them for chain-posts and ran far away.
45. Even the salty ocean, filled up with the ambrosial draught streaming forth from the full moon’s orb that was melted down by the flames of the soaring submarine fire, readily transformed into the ocean of ambrosia.
46. There ensued a long-lasting union of the (five) great elements when the earthen dust from the shore, raised up by tidal winds, and the ocean’s waters, intermingled with the flames of the submarine fire, pervaded the celestial space.[32]
47. It seemed as if the entire watery mass, reddened by the rays of the finest rubies, burnished in the turbulent tide, was engulfed with wild abandon by the submarine fire’s chain of flames. 
48. Encroaching upon the nether regions with its deep current and the heaven’s surface with its waves, the (ocean’s) watery expanse – girdle of the all-bearing Earth – fused the three worlds together in an aqueous harmony.[33]
49. Mermaids, who were sitting on a stretch of swaying waves, learnt without much effort the secret of playing on pleasure swings in the company of lovers.[34]
50. Ready to suppress the stubborn surge of waters, there doubtlessly arrived a second set of submarine fires, masquerading as flashes of light emitted by herbs glowing atop the mountains that rose to the ocean’s surface from its depth.[35] 
51. Seemingly mistaking the faces of the seafaring merchants’ wives for many a moon, the spirited sea sent waves crashing over every nook and corner of the ships sailing in its midst.[36]
52. As the (red) gleam of the coral reefs – moving to and fro in the billowy tide – spread around, a spontaneous coat of vermilion adorned the faces of the aquatic elephants that came in contact with it.
53. For perfuming their thick tresses, the moon-faced mistresses of the sky-wandering gods resorted to the fragrant smoke that rose from the submarine fire’s burning down of young camphor trees dotting the shoreline.
54. and 55) In this way, the Ocean – paramour of Rivers - was stirred up by his friendly relationship with the Moon’s Rays; (the Ocean) into whose waters the swans that carry Brahma - dwelling in the navel lotus of Lord Vishnu, abiding within – plunged by way of the moon’s multiple reflections; (the Ocean) who thrashed the Sky with his upraised waves as if angry at her for sheltering sage Agastya (i.e., the Agastya asterism).[37]
56. “May the moon’s rays – white in hue due, as it were, to a sticky mass of pollen dust blown away from the Tagara flowers (that have blossomed) on the mountains by the side of the Eastern Sea; heavily laden, or so it seems, with the abundant smiles which they snatched away from the lovelorn woman’s face; furnished, as it were, with flakes of skin shed by the serpents hiding in the Rising Mountain’s caves; and resembling the laughter of Lady Night – allay your fatigue.
57. May the Moon’s rays/feet – red in colour as they emerge, appearing therefore like designs drawn with saffron on the face of Lady Night – presently greet you with joy. It seems as if they (i.e., the red rays/feet) are dripping blood, evidently because of coming in contact with the tips of the long thorns sticking out from the stems of lotuses growing in clusters, (lotuses) which they stamped upon, desirous of shutting their petals.
58. May that blessed light – Heaven’s ornament - quickly dispel our sorrow, (light) that springs from the moon/is made of gold; puts an end to the red flush of lotuses in every direction/is distinguished by the presence of rubies all along its rim; radiates brightly, being interspersed with the (moon’s) bright black spot/ is studded with close-set sapphires; and is polished on the sky’s whetstone slab.[38]
59. May the orb – highly esteemed by herbs – of the god who is the ocean’s friend (i.e., the moon) become the medicine to cure us at once of our long-standing malady that is lovelornliness. Due to the dark spot overlying it, it seems as if bumblebees - seeking the lingering scent of all the lotus clusters that are being closed (by the moon) – have made the interior of this orb their home.[39]
60. May the lunar orb – freely imagined by poets as the pearl that adorns Lady East’s parting hairline – readily destroy your woes. Under the pretext of carrying a young rabbit, it seems to forever display on its person a sliver of the solar steeds’ shimmering splendour, imbibed while entering into the sun each and every new-moon day.[40] 
61. May the orb of the moon – lord of the stars – assuredly grant you your wish again and again. Resembling a pearl-studded anklet that adorns Miss Heaven – with the deer spot expanding on all sides like its central void and the stars sprouting nearby serving as ornamental gems –  it captivates the eyes of doe-eyed damsels with its beauty.[41] 
62. May the Moon’s spot – seemingly blackened by the fresh, wild-grown grass adhering to him as he roamed through the bowers atop the Rising Mountain – reinforce our joy. The lovelorn woman’s cheeks – flooded night after night with a continuous flow of kohl-mixed tears – assume a dark hue due, as it were, to the glow radiating from it (i.e., the lunar spot).
63. May the moon’s dark mark, shining forth before us, further our fortunes. Occupying the centre of the lunar orb, it bears a collective resemblance to the handsome, free-flowing tresses of passionate women with roving eyes. Disguised as its (i.e., the mark’s) far-reaching stream of effulgence, the Beloved lord of Nights, competing as it were with the Sun, readily begets the brimming waters of Yamuna.[42]
64. May the glossy black mark on the full moon, whose (white) glow is a close companion of the Sindhuvara blossoms, offer you unpretentious protection. Robbing bee swarms of their beauty, it shines forth like a slice of sapphire transferred (to the moon) from the crest of the raging ocean’s sky-licking surge.[43]  
65. May the Lord of Brahmins/birds (i.e., the Moon/Garuda) alleviate your pain that is produced by the venom of long-lasting lovelornliness. He carries a dark spot/Vishnu on his person; emerges/emerged out by breaking through the sun’s deep core/deeply delicate core of his egg; makes the bodies of love-struck men/hole-dwelling serpents go through endless cold shivers, and covers the centre of the sky by attaining fullness after entering the waxing phase (of the month)/spreading his massive wings.[44]
66. May the King of night (i.e., the Moon) – reddened by his association with the twilight’s crimson glow, appearing thereby to have brought along a portion of the submarine fire’s blazing effulgence as he emerged from the sea – put an end to your misery. Even the white lilies, bathed in his light, turn intense red for a moment, posing a challenge, as it were, for the entire lotus family.[45]
67. May the Lily’s Life companion (i.e., the Moon) bring us bountiful happiness time and again. His orb – akin to a whetstone slab for sharpening Kama’s arrows and possessed of a glossy black spot in its centre that resembles an erosion mark resulting from rubbing them (i.e., the arrows) against it – appears like a whirlpool of foam in the midst of the sea that is the sky.[46]
68. May the Night’s Lord – during whose explicit emergence from the solar orb on the new-moon day, people make numerous guesses such as “Is the Sun, having playfully released the gushing waters of Yamuna in the past, letting loose Ganga too at present?” - remove your obstacles at the blessed beginning of love-sports.[47]
69. May the deer-spotted God (i.e., the Moon) – akin to an ornamental Makara mark made with sandalwood paste on Night’s face – bring you the pleasure of plunging into every single wave of love’s lively stream. Each new-moon day, his digit, like a crystalline goad, readily pierces through the sun’s orb – the frontal globe, smeared red with powdered vermilion, of the elephant that is the day.[48] 
70. Let either the Moon or the Sun – whose rays, characterized by coolness/sharpness in every direction, readily supress the pride (owing to its brightness)/tide of the milky ocean/ocean and who, marked by a keen ability to make lily thickets bloom/secure the earth’s joy, is possessed of a form that forever sports a deer (within)/delights in expanding lotuses – herald the hour of unfathomable increase in your fortunes.[49]
71. May the cool-rayed Moon, mysterious in his conduct, ward off your bad luck. Though himself the king of Brahmins, he betrays a fondness for drinking wine/associating with Varuna’s Direction (i.e., the West) on a daily basis; though he possesses a majestic sword/orb, he endeavours to singularly shatter swords/darkness; and though he is inhabited by Vishnu/a deer, he makes Lakshmi/lotuses wither away.[50]
72. Disguised as the incense smoke billowing out through the latticed pleasure windows of young maidens, embodied Night herself seems to hold the Moon in an embrace as he drips in dewdrops that resemble beads of sweat sticking close to one another. May the Night’s Sweetheart bless us with the friendly company of happiness that stretches for an eternity.” 
73. As amorous ladies started confidently for the place of their rendezvous – creeper bowers located in pleasure gardens - to experience the joy of lovemaking in secrecy, the elderly womenfolk reinforced a rich crop of bristling hair in each and every limb of their body with blessings such as these that were inspired by the hour of moonrise.[51]  
74. “Abloom on the tree of sky, the moon’s a blossom bright. This deer of his is a swarm of bees. Hail him, Night’s delight![52] 
75. In the triple world, it’s you who soothes eyes at twilight. Who can match your noble deeds, Creator of the night?
76. The sea’s a fancy ball with which you play at night always. Who’s as jolly as you are, O Lord of cooling rays?
77. Is there a heart that you can’t steal, li’l moon on the new-moon day? You’re Kama’s curved and shining sword that holds the worlds in sway.
78. It’s only you, the lord of stars, who rules this mortal sphere. The Fish-flagged One gains glory great when you, O Moon, are here.
79. My heart tells me your sweetheart’s Night, O Moon of nectared rays! When the scorching Sun is out of sight, she lifts her lily-face. 
80. Who lauds him not, this Night-maker – crest of the God of Hills? The bony corpse on the Lord’s shoulder with life his nectar fills.[53]
81. The Moon’s a hatchet verily sharp to the tree of a maiden’s pique. Let’s greet his light that owes to the Night its glory so unique.
82. To the friend of ladies lovely-eyed, to you, O Moon, we bow. Ne’er may we see you swiftly step on the Setting Mountain’s brow.
83. The Moon in the midst of his starry crew – joy to the world he brings. The seawater, with lightning’s speed, from beyond the sky he flings.
84. Your rays, O Moon, are rich in fame; we wish them victory pure. When high they rise, no anger thrives in youthful hearts for sure.
85. May your lustre’s swelling stream bathe our bodies well. Kama puts his trust in it and dreads no gloomy spell.”
86. Thus, with lovers by their side, did joyful ladies praise in sweetest words the Lunar Lord whose nectar fills our gaze.[54]
87. “It’s so very sad the wind turned harsh when you were on your way to fulfil my bidding. Look how the curls of your braid, its knot dishevelled, hang loose.”[55]
88. “Dear friend! Did you perchance have a bath after touching that proven sinner? Your limbs, I notice, are wet and your forehead too is not marked with a tika.”[56]
89. “Beautiful girl! In what way, I would like to know, did he scare you so much when you were all alone that even now your look is unsettled and the persistent shivering doesn’t stop.”[57] 
90. “It is solely that musk-based cosmetic paste which has put you in trouble. For, every limb of yours is covered in wounds caused by the bite of bees attracted to its fragrance”.[58]
91. “Dear friend! There is no doubt you were battered by a relentlessly cold wind wherefore your body – uninterrupted horripilation running all over it - trembles even now.”
92. “Did he initiate a fight – nail against nail – with someone? And you suddenly barged in between to stop it, thus suffering scratches from his nails?”[59] 
93. So, even as they presently concealed their anger, youthful maidens made their female messengers, whose limbs bore marks of (secret) enjoyment with their lovers, tremble (in fear) by using words that were tutored in the art of crookedness by their shapely eyebrows, or so it seemed.[60] 
94. In this way, the Moon – preceptor to youths in the lore of love – placed a handful of stars, standing for flowers, on Lady Night’s tresses in the form of the cloudless sky’s surface. Thus blessed by him, who opens/liberates the circle of Lilies that longingly grasp his ray/feet, she closed her lotus-eyes (in devotional ecstasy).[61]
95. I believe the Moon, desirous of redeeming Kama (his friend), who was burnt down by Shiva, spread his lavish light on the ground as if it were the waters of Ganga – (waters) that scattered a spray of tiny droplets, disguised as the newly sprouting stars, far away; and that betrayed the beauty of the (Ganga-Yamuna) confluence at Prayaga by mingling with the smoke of aloe incense billowing forth from the homes of pretty women.[62] 
96. Though they shut their eyes in petrified silence, overcome by suspicion even when the young leaves of the creepers in their vicinity were rustled by the wind and though they were filled with singular fear in the freshly sprouting darkness, there was not one meeting place where young maidens did not wait all alone for their lovers.
97. Discarding the red robes of the twilight clouds; donning the silken garment of moonlight over her person, smartly smeared with the musk paste of darkness; and wearing a garland of newly blossoming Vichakila buds by way of the starry clusters, Lady Heaven was presently busy, or so it appeared, in a protracted makeup ritual, the moon’s orb putting on the semblance of her mirror. 
________________
[1]Kama is dark green in hue (JR).
[2]The description of Kama’s mane as ‘loosely flowing’ is indicative of his casual attitude – of regarding the worlds as no more than a blade of grass (JR).
[3]That a parasol, which must offer shade, heats up (the hearts of lovelorn women) is the element of surprise in this verse (JR).
[4]Bards sing the praises of those who gratify them with gifts (JR).  
[5]Gatekeepers stop intruders from entering into mansions. There is a hint of contradiction in describing the fifth note as the first (among gatekeepers).
[6]Kama is fish-bannered. 
[7]Rati casts jealous glances at Kama because he is all set to marry ‘Jagajjayalakṣmī’ (‘Universe’s Lady Victory’). Verses 1 to 12 form a Kulaka set (JR).
[8]Rama killed the demoness Tāṭakā.  
[9]An allusion to Shiva burning down Kama for disturbing his penance.
[10]Self-respecting people momentarily fake pride when they are defeated but gradually overcome it. But Kama continuous to be as proud as ever, even allowing his pride to transform into arrogance (JR).
[11]An allusion, again, to Shiva’s burning down of Kama. JR glosses ‘I (Rati) have already concluded that are dead (seeing your risky behaviours as regards the sages). So, let me also die along with you (instead of suffering the pangs of widowhood)’.
[12]According to JR, this verse is Rati’s reply to an imagined objection by Kama: ‘My march is neither against the self-controlled ascetics, nor even to kill women but to put an end to the latter’s love-anger’. Rati seems to argue against this objection by suggesting that women enrich the experience of love by feigning anger momentarily.
[13]The very fact that Kama wields flowers as arrows implies that he is against violence (Vide ‘cāpena te karma na cātihiṃsram’, Kumārasambhava, 3.22). JR explains the compound ‘sumanomārgaṇa’ as ‘vidvadyācaka’, i.e., ‘wise supplicants’. However, it is better to understand it as ‘godly supplicants’ because it was the gods that pleaded with Kama to disturb Shiva’s penance (Vide ‘surāḥ samabhyarthayitāra ete’, Kumārasambhava, 3.22)
[14]For having instilled incestuous thoughts in him, Brahma cursed Kama that he shall be burnt to ashes by Shiva (svasutopagamādbrahmā śaśāpa kusumāyudham || yasmānmamābhibhavatā manaḥ saṅkṣobhitaṃ śaraiḥ | tasmāttvaddehamacirādrudro bhasmīkariṣyati ||, Matsyapurāṇa, 4.12,13). 
[15]Gems and magical charms can act against poisons but not reverse the effects of Kama’s arrows (JR). 
[16]Verses 13 to 24 form a Kulaka set (JR).
[17]Śotha (oedema), the swelling of different parts of the body due to an accumulation of fluid, results from unhealthy food habits and life-style (viruddhāhāravihāra) (JR). One type of śotha results from exposure to cold winds and is therefore common in winter (‘himānila --- shvayathuḥ syādvisarpavān, Mādhavanidāna, 36.11, 12).
[18]The idea is that the seeds of poison are sown in her body that is akin to a field after wetting it with her tears and ploughing it. The ploughing activity is inferred through the pain that accompanies her lovelornliness (JR).
[19]The wearing of a sacred thread would make her a Brahmin and therefore exempt from killing in spite of committing an offence (JR). 
[20]The lady in this verse is jealous because she sees her lover everywhere, hugged by the directions that are personified as women (JR).
[21]The idea is that a circle of kohl-stained (large) tear drops hides the presence of the dark lotus leaves over her breasts. It is only the sighing breaths that, by making the latter flutter, can help distinguish between the two.  
[22]‘Vicinity of her ears’, because such messages are whispered into the ears (JR). 
[23]The desiderative present participle form ‘yiyāsatām’ (desirous of leaving’) suggests that the vital breaths will abandon her the very next day (JR).
[24]The import is that there is a faint chance the lovelorn lady may survive even now if her lover manages to meet her soon. And, if she survives, he will be spared the calumny of being the cause of her death. 
[25]‘Ucculumpyatām’ is derived from the verb root ‘culump’. Verses 25 to 35 form a Kulaka.
[26]The pearls that were strewn by the ocean resembled stars (JR).
[27]The seven divine sages are Bharadvāja, Kaśyapa, Gautama, Viśvāmitra, Jamadagni, Vasiṣṭha, and Atri. Vāruṇī – wine, personified as a goddess, was born during the churning of the ocean.
[28]The Mīna and Makara constellations too appear like fish and the sea-animal Makara respectively. Because of this similarity in appearance, the astrologers could not distinguish the constellations from the fish and the Makaras that leapt up from the ocean.
[29]According to the Śabdakalpadruma, Bhauma (Mars) is reddish white in colour (raktagauravarṇa). Śukra (Mercury), Budha (Venus), and Bṛhaspati (Jupiter), on the other hand, are white (śuklavarṇa), grass-green (dūrvāśyāmavarṇa), and yellow (pītavarṇa) in colour. 
[30]Santānaka is one among the five heavenly trees, the other four being Mandāra, Pārijāta, Kalpavṛkṣa, and Haricandana.
[31]Auspicious conches are blown when kings set out on a military march (JR).
[32]The earthen dust, tidal winds, ocean’s waters, submarine fire, and the celestial apace represent the five elements. 
[33]The ocean pervades the nether regions, the earth, and the heaven with its waters. 
[34]The idea is that the swaying waves were akin to swings and the mermaids playing on them clung to their lovers for support.  
[35]Oṣadhis (herbs) are often described in Sanskrit literature as glowing with light (Vide ‘bhavanti yatrauṣadhayo rajanyāmatailapūrāḥ suratapradīpāḥ’, Kumārasambhava, 1.10)
[36]Sāṃyātrika = potavaṇik (JR) = ship merchant 
[37]The moon’s multiple reflections appear like swans waiting upon Brahma, who resides in the lotus that springs from the navel of Vishnu, himself reclining in the ocean. Sage Agastya drank up the ocean, wherefore the latter regards him as its enemy and thrashes the sky with its waves for sheltering the sage who is identified with an asterism (etāvaduktvā vacanaṃ maitrāvaruṇiracyutaḥ | samudramapibatkruddhaḥ sarvalokasya paśyataḥ ||, Mahābhārata, 3.103.3). Verses 36 to 55 form a Kulaka (JR). 
[38]To explicate the pun, the light (1) stems from the moon, (2) causes the lotuses to wither away, and (3) radiates brightly, being interspersed with the moon’s black spot. Likewise, the ornament (1) is made of gold, (2) consists of rubies along its rim, and (3) is studded with close-set sapphires. The compound ‘nibiḍatara-mahānīla-lakṣmāñcitatvam’, agreeing with the description of ‘ornament’, must be taken as two separate compound words ‘nibiḍatara-mahā’ and ‘nīla-lakṣmāñcitatvam’ in the case of ‘moonlight’ (JR). 
[39]Bumblebees and the moon’s spot are both black in colour. 
[40]The Sun’s steeds are dark green in colour, which is why one of his names is ‘Haridaśva’. The moon is believed to enter into the sun on the new-moon day (‘candramā vā amāvāsyāyāmādityamanupraviśati’, Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.28).
[41]‘Bobhavītu’ is the loṭ (imperative), yaṅ (frequentative) form derived from the verb root ‘bhū’ (JR).
[42]The dark-hued river Yamuna is the Sun’s daughter.  
[43]The ocean is a ‘mine of gems’ (‘ratnākara’) and therefore possesses sapphires too.
[44]The pun comparing the moon to Garuda can be explicated as follows: The moon (1) has a black-spot, (2) emerges out by breaking the sun’s core, (3) causes cold shivers to lovelorn people, and (4) occupies the centre of the sky after attaining fullness. Garuda (1) carries Vishnu, (2) emerged out of his delicate egg, (3) causes cold shivers to serpents, and (4) occupies the centre of the sky by spreading his wings. The string of letters in ‘gāḍhamārtāṇḍagarbham’ must be read as ‘gāḍha-mārtāṇḍa-garbham’ (‘deep core of the sun’) and ‘gāḍham ārtāṇḍa-garbham’ (‘deeply delicate core of the egg’) in relation to the moon and Garuda respectively (JR).
[45]The white lilies, bathed in the crimson light of the rising moon, appear like lotuses (JR). 
[46]The moon is like a whetstone and the black spot in its centre like a mark caused by rubbing Kama’s arrows on it.
[47]The moon’s digit emerging from the sun’s orb on the new-moon day appears like the stream of Ganga. 
[48]The day is compared to an elephant, whose vermillion-smeared frontal globe is the sun, pierced through by crescent moon that appears like a curved goad.
[49]The moon is equated with the sun through pun. The moon (1) possesses cool rays that supress the pride of the milky ocean by their superiorly bright lustre, (2) makes lilies bloom, and (3) bears a deer-mark. The sun (1) possesses sharp rays that suppress the nocturnal tide of the ocean, (2) secures the earth’s joy (by invigorating all living beings), and (3) makes lotuses bloom.
[50]A verse with apparent contradictions effected through pun.
[51]Verses 56 to 73 form a Kulaka set. 
[52]Verses 74 to 86 are composed in a meter that resembles the Prākṛta meter Dohā to a great extent except that it has 1 extra mora in each line. The Dohā meter is characterized by 13 and 11 morae respectively in the odd (1st and 3rd) and the even (2nd and 4th) lines (‘teraha mattā paḍhama paa, puṇu eāraha deha | puṇu teraha eārahaī, dohā lakkhaṇa eha ||’, Prākṛtapaiṅgala, 1.78). However, Mankha’s verses have 14 and 12 morae in the corresponding lines. Sanskrit verses following the same metrical pattern are also to be found in the 24th hymn, called ‘Dvipadayamaka’, of Stutikusumāñjali, composed by the Kashmirian poet Jagaddhara, who lived in the 14th century AD. A characteristic feature of these verses is the incorporation of figures of sound such as Prāsa (rhyme, as in ‘bhujaṅgaḥ’ and ‘kuraṅgaḥ’, 12.74) and Yamaka (repetition of a string of letters in two different senses, as in ‘mahimānaḥ’ and ‘nahi mānaḥ’, 12.84).  
[53]The corpse that dangles from Shiva’s shoulder is infused with life by the ambrosia dripping from the moon on his crest. One of the forms of Shiva, called ‘Kaṅkālamūrti’, is depicted as carrying a bony corpse (‘kaṅkāla’) on the left shoulder. A staff (‘Kaṅkāladaṇḍa’) that is held by the left hand is shoved into the anus of the dark black corpse, its legs tied to the staff with a rope and eyes oozing blood (‘vāmahaste ca daṇḍaṃ tu kaṅkālāsthi ca dhārayet || tadasthnākṛti nirmāṃsaṃ dvipādaṃ dvikarānvitam | kṛṣṇaśyāmanibhākāramapāne daṇḍaveśanam || daṇḍe kaṅkālapādau dvau rajjunā bandhayedbudhaḥ | ketudaṇḍena netrābhyāṃ niṣkrāntaṃ rudhiraṃ tu vā || evaṃ kaṅkāladaṇḍaṃ tu vāmaskandhopari ntaset |’, Śilparatna, Part 2, 22.120-123).
[54]Verses 74 to 86 form a Kulaka set.
[55]In verses 87 to 92, female messengers are chided sarcastically by their mistresses for secretly enjoying with the very men to whom they were supposed to convey their message.   
[56]The messenger’s limbs are wet due to sweat and her tika mark has been rubbed off in the act of lovemaking. 
[57]The address ‘Beautiful girl’ has a sarcastic tone to it and gives the reason why the messenger girl was enjoyed by the sender’s lover (JR).
[58]The idea is this verse contrasts with that in the previous one. Whereas the messenger in the previous verse was enjoyed by her mistress’s lover after she met him, the reason being her beauty, the mistress in this verse suggests that her messenger left, in fact, with the intension of making love to her paramour, which, in turn, is proved by the fact that she smeared her limbs with precious musk paste before leaving. The bite marks described here are not necessarily due to the bees but also include those made by the unfaithful lover.
[59]The nail marks described here are due to the act of dalliance but explained otherwise as caused by the messenger coming in between two people fighting.
[60]Verses 87 to 93 form a Kulaka 
[61]A Guru too places handful of flowers on the head of a woman whom he wishes to bless, causing her to close her eyes in ecstasy, and liberates her co-disciples, who grasp his feet.
[62]Prayāga is an important pilgrimage centre, believed to redeem people of their sins. It is also a place where death rites are performed (prayāgaṃ viśataḥ puṃsaḥ pāpaṃ naśyati tatkṣaṇāt | gaṅgāyamunamāsādya tyajet prāṇān prayatnataḥ (kūrmapurāṇa, 1.34.28, 31). 


#========
Canto13


1. And then, the lotus-eyed maidens of heaven – travellers in Love’s lane – revelled in the joy of applying makeup, which is the premier magical charm for captivating the eyes (of beholders).
2. A certain golden-hued girl smeared her limbs with saffron. But her act, akin to the application of sandalwood paste on a crystal slab, did not in the least add up to anything.[1]
3. Afraid that the arrows of Kama shall inevitably fall on her, one long-eyed maiden donned, as it were, a protective iron armour by covering her body with thick musk paste.
4. Another young lady whitened her frame by rubbing powdered camphor over it, which (i.e., camphor) appeared like the ornamental ash dusted off from the body of the lordly elephant called Kama as he shook it about.[2]
5. Their sweet scent reiterated by the application of a bright unguent prepared from equal amounts of four aromatic ingredients, the bodies of fickle-eyed women displayed, or so it seemed, a second layer of musk through the swarms of black bees alighting on them.
6. A doe-eyed damsel painted at one go a decorative design on her forehead with aloe paste, a design that conjured up the gradually evolving spectacle of the Moon embracing embodied Night.[3]
7. A circular design drawn with camphor on a lotus-eyed maiden’s face – Kama’s pleasure resort – assumed the role of Rati’s fancy crystalline mirror.
8. A round forehead mark drawn with liquid musk by yet another girl appeared like a third eye which she had sprouted by the power of Kama’s divine grace. 
9. A certain lovely-faced lady fashioned an ornamental design on her forehead with saffron paste, which (i.e., the design) resembled Kama’s steadily glowing soul, left behind after his body was consumed in Shiva’s anger. 
10. A certain woman adorned her braid with white Sindhuvara flowers, due to which the moon of her face forged a simultaneous alliance with (literally, ‘simultaneously hugged’) the bright as well as the dark halves of the month. 
11.  When the celestial nymphs adorned their tresses with the wreath of Atimuktaka blossoms, the rays radiating from the sapphires in their tiaras took on the nature of still bumblebees. 
12.  The womenfolk wore in their ears many close-set rubies, whose rich radiance rendered the lustre of their eye corners doubly red.[4] 
13.  A female attendant painted decorative designs on the round cheeks of her pretty-limbed mistress slowly. Thanks to the lustre of  the latter’s playful smile, they seemed to be drawn with camphor in spite of being drawn with musk.[5]
14.  A certain girl decorated her ear with a bejewelled earring that seemed to be completely covered in rows of goosebumps - masquerading as an inlay of pearls - because of abutting against her smooth cheek. 
15.  A circular design drawn with aloe paste on the forehead of a beautiful woman looked like a little lotus leaf afloat on the uninterrupted stream of her facial glow. 
16.  A gem-studded earring, reflected on the clean surface of a celestial maiden’s cheek, thoroughly mimicked a freshly fashioned circular basin of the tree that is Kama.[6]
17.  In vain did the celestial women hold mirrors in their hand when their sweethearts stood before them. For, they were nowhere capable of taking away their eyes from the latter’s faces.[7]
18.  As they were being adorned with ivory bangles, the tender, creeper-like arms of the divine damsels appeared to be throttled by lotus fibres, pointedly angry at the theft of their bright beauty (by the arms).[8] 
19.  The newly fashioned string of pearls came close to the celestial concubines’ plump breasts and forged a strong alliance with them, seemingly due to the love it had for its source - the elephant’s frontal globes.[9]
20.  Attracted to her fragrant facial cosmetic, a scattering swarm of honeybees alighted greedily on the cheeks of a woman, so it seemed she had grown a beard in her desire to gain mastery over the women-on-the-top act.[10]
21.  Young women adorned the precincts of their breasts with newly crafted ruby necklaces, due to whose radiating rays the application of saffron powder over their bodies was rendered completely redundant. 
22.  One of those girls wore a sapphirine crest jewel on her forehead, its lustrous rays grabbed unsuccessfully by her paramour who mistook them for a thick mass of hair.
23.  Another girl, gripped by longstanding desire, put on a ruby bracelet, whose rays masqueraded as the fresh leaves sprouted by the creeper of slender arm.[11] 
24.  A certain maiden, her eyes widened in joy, donned a gem-studded waist-band hurriedly. Since her hips were hidden by the rays emanating from it, she did not suffer bashfulness during her lovemaking.[12]
25.  Having forcibly snatched away the splendour of the full-moon/all eminent Brahmins, the broad forehead of a beautiful dame seemed to hide itself in shame behind the veil of her flowing curls.[13] 
26.  Smudged heavily with the kohl paint dripping from the tip of straight brushes, the eyes of pretty-eyed maidens drank in the nocturnal darkness to reveal, or so it seemed, the paths leading to the trysting places. 
27.  Adorned with an overhanging pearl string and suffused with a multitude of rays spreading out from the bejewelled girdle, the midriff of lovely-eyed lasses enjoyed effortless ornamentation on both sides. 
28.  The artist that is Love drew his imagination on the canvas-like chest of ladies with pencils of rays radiating from the multi-coloured gem necklaces adorning their buxom bosoms.
29.  One modest girl readily hid her face in a deep blue lattice veil, fabricated by the honeybees that hovered around the thick cluster of fragrant flowers serving as her ear ornament
30.  A dense mass of aloe wood smoke engulfed the lush tresses of the celestial courtesans, its contours mimicked by an attendant swarm of greedy bees.[14] 
31.  A certain lover carefully painted decorative Makara designs on the sloping breasts of a divine damsel only for the sweat dripping from the tip of his hand to wipe them off in an instant.
32.  Shy at her lover’s staring gaze, another girl covered her breasts with a bodice. But luckily for him, it gave way at the seams due to the loftiness of her breasts, thereby satiating his eyes with ambrosia.[15] 
33.  Yet another girl, her frame naturally and resolutely fair in complexion, smeared the slushy paste of musk over her breasts, wherefore her lover could never once pull his eyes away from them, as if they had got deeply struck (in the slushy paste). 
34.  A heavenly nymph’s expert makeup, though worked with care, lay concealed by the copious glow gleaming forth spontaneously from her physical frame.
35.  By forgoing a girdle and a pair of anklets - both noisy - at the very beginning of her toilet, another woman clearly communicated to a clever confidant her desire for going on a romantic rendezvous.[16]
36.  As their lovers arrived, the fickle-eyed fairies, their senses thoroughly confused and minds distracted, simply couldn’t give a final touch to their makeup ritual.
37.  The celestial women’s faces, reflected on polished crystalline mirrors,  repeatedly conjured up the magical union of the lotus and the moon.[17] 
38.  Overflowing with excitement at the arrival of her sweetheart, a certain woman abandoned the red lac dye for good and slipped her soft legs into a sparkling pair of smoothly polished ruby anklets.[18]
39.  The lotus-faced heavenly beauties wore strings woven with pearls that appeared like heaps of hailstones rained down by Kama to pulverize the confidence of youthful men.[19]
40.  Foreseeing for a long time that (the sheen of) gold would be drowned by her bodily glow, a certain golden-hued girl bedecked herself with emerald ornaments that stood out enchantingly against the background. 
41.  Mirrored in the central gem, a lover doubly graced his woman’s bosom, rendered richly radiant by a pretty pearl necklace placed over it.[20] 
42.  In the milky ocean of feminine beauty, whose corals and rows of pearls were the rosy lips and well-set teeth, a string of (bright) bamboo beads adorning the parting of the hair appeared like a line of spray that had materialized in the presence of the moon-face.[21] 
43.  How strange! The women’s bodies made the loverfolk’s eyes thirsty though they caused a surge of delight in Kama/the ocean’s waters; were naturally endowed with lofty, plump breasts/clouds; and possessed outstanding armlets/water drops.
44.  As they went about decorating their limbs in different ways, the deer-eyed damsels created a lot of noise with their girdles, armlets, anklets, and the like. But all that loud clang drowned in the hum of bees – panegyrists of the Vasantika flowers adorning their tresses that bounced about in the fun-filled frenzy.
45.  Thickly overspread with their rich, inborn bodily glow that was interwoven with the radiant light rippling forth from their gem-studded jewellery, even the very fine robes donned by the women did not allow the paramours to catch a glimpse of their limbs. 
46.  Since the ladies in the hall were reflected in each other’s crystal necklaces, their lovers could not recognize who among them belonged to whom even as they presently approached them in hurried excitement.
47.  Based on the innate superiority, intermediateness, or inferiority of beauty’s brushstrokes in each individual case, makeup served to alter, sharpen, enrich, or artificialize the physical features of the Chakora-eyed maidens.[22] 
48.  In this way, when the pretty-browed ladies on Mt. Kailasa were finished with their vibrant makeup, they readily abandoned the mirrors which had hitherto been the blessed recipient of their reflected forms. But they rendered their rich attire fruitful by being reflected in their lovers’ hearts that were favourably disposed/perfectly circular in shape and pure/polished (like the mirrors which they abandoned).
49.  As the doe-eyed divine damsels, who stood testimony to a tantalizing variety of amorous graces in Kama’s heavenly realm, wore their lavish makeup with much flair, bumblebees feasting on the fragrance of Vasantika flowers fastened to their manes that swung to and fro in the sportive frenzy seemed to shout “Well done! Well done!”
50.  And there, among them, a certain damsel, whose face resembled a lotus in bloom, stood as the very paragon of feminine charm. Though her gorgeously grand makeup had come off while making vehement love to an ardent lover, she outdid her co-wives with effortless ease since their bodies boasted of nothing more than cosmetic makeup, which they tenaciously held on to with great difficulty. 
51.  Thus bringing the rest of their grooming act – the foremost companion of sexual sports – to a grand finale in a myriad of wonderful ways, the slender-limbed women, who held the hands of their amorous lovers in their own, became the pleasure garden’s principal adornment as they amused themselves with play. 
52.  Thickly smeared in layers and layers of makeup/distinguished by ripples of deep red radiance and pleasing the paramours/bees with its natural, intense, and free-flowing fragrance, the bright frame of every celestial damsel delighted her lover as he leisurely drank it in like wine, his lively, expanding eyes standing for goblets.[23]   
________________
[1]Since sandalwood paste and crystal are equally white, the former will not stand out if applied on the latter. The girl described in this verse is as golden-hued as saffron, wherefore the latter will not be seen if rubbed on her limbs.
[2]Camphor and ash are both white in colour (JR). 
[3]The dark design drawn with aloe paste stands for night and the damsel’s face for the moon. The design unfolds in stages during the drawing process, wherefore the union of the moon and night is described as evolving gradually.
[4]The rubies adorned not just the ears but also the eye corners (JR). 
[5]Since the cheeks of the mistress were already bright and the musk paste too was brightened by her smile, the attendant could not make out the design from its background, wherefore she took a lot of time to finish the painting. Mankha’s use of the word ‘cirāt’ (‘slowly’) is significant because of this reason.  
[6]The purport is that the ladies brought glory to Kama (JR). 
[7]The women never got a chance to look at their reflected faces in the mirror because their eyes were fixed on the lovers’ faces (JR).
[8]The idea is that the arms surpassed lotus fibres in slenderness and beauty. 
[9]Plump breasts are often compared to the frontal globes of elephants. 
[10]Puriṣāyita, literally ‘acting like a man’, also called ‘viparītarati’, is a type of coitus in which the woman assists a man by sitting on his top (‘tamadho’vapātya puruṣāyitena sāhāyyaṃ dadyāt’, Kāmasūtra 2.8).
[11]‘Anaṅgavatī’ (‘gripped by desire’) = ‘saṅkalpitopabhogā’ (‘intending to enjoy dalliance’) (JR). New leaves are reddish in colour.
[12]Her eyes widened in joy because of the absence of bashfulness (JR).
[13]One hides oneself in shame after committing a grave mistake. 
[14]The contours of the smoke were imitated by a swarm of bees attracted to the former’s fragrance (JR).
[15]The word ‘etya’ is employed twice, at the same place in the 2nd and 4th lines of the verse, for achieving ekarūpatā (stylistic unity) (JR).
[16]The idea is that the woman wanted to go on a secret rendezvous and therefore did not wear the girdle and anklets, both of which might betray her presence by their noise.
[17]The moon and the lotus are regarded as mutually opposed to one another. Here, the faces and crystalline mirrors stand for the lotus and moon respectively.
[18]The spreading lustre of the ruby anklets can itself serve the purpose of red lac. 
[19]Pearls resemble hailstones by their shape and colour. 
[20]The idea is that the lover beautified his beloved’s bosom both by reclining over it and by being reflected in the central gem of her necklace.
[21]JR glosses ‘vaṃśajalatā’ as ‘mauktikasīmā’, i.e., ‘pearls marking the boundary (between the hair parted into two at the centre)’. ‘Vaṃśaja’ literally means ‘arising from bamboo’. According to Sanskrit poetic convention, pearls are produced from various sources, one of which is bamboo (‘dvipendrajīmūtavarāha-śaṅkhmatsyāhiśuktyudbhavaveṇujāni | muktāphalāni prathitāni loke teṣāṃ ca śuktyudbhavameva bhūri ||, Garuḍa Purāṇa, 1.69.1)
[22]The idea is that makeup endowed women who were not naturally beautiful with fresh beauty; it enhanced the beauty that was already present in the intermediate class of women; and masked the natural beauty of the superior class of women (JR).
[23]The word ‘prasannā’ is employed both as a noun, in the sense of ‘wine’, and as an adjective, meaning ‘bright’, to qualify the physical frame of the heavenly damsels. 


#========
Canto14


1. Thereafter, the freely flirtatious, fine-browed females wished to make wine – teacher par excellence in imparting the knowledge of love’s foremost secrets – a guest of their ambrosial lips in the company of lovers under a creeper canopy.[1]
2. Enticed by her sweet smell, swarms of bees encircled the copious Wine – Balarama’s favourite – making it seem as if he had greedily hid her in the bejewelled goblets with his deep blue garment.[2]
3. Fetched at the very outset, the brand-new ruby goblets seemed to stretch out tongues, disguised as patches of (red) radiance, so they could sip the wine that would pour down shortly.[3] 
4. When the attendants poured out a continuous stream of wine from large barrels into smaller containers, it made a gurgling noise in the joyful anticipation, or so it seemed, of an imminent kiss from the heavenly maidens.[4]
5. Appearing very much like sapphire goblets gifted by sylvan deities, circles of bees, greedy to imbibe the sweet fragrance, swirled around in cups that were filled with plentiful wine.[5] 
6. Drunk, as it were, on the wine flooding their interiors/bellies, large golden pitchers that were placed in front of fickle-eyed maidens seemed to mutter something indistinctly through the hum of bumblebees.
7. The wine glimmered steadily within the goblets, its beautiful dark red glow appearing like a quick gift made by coral reefs when it was born from the ocean.[6] 
8. Since she sacrificed her own self to confer pure delight on beings and was an object of love for many people, there was no place whatsoever where Wine was regarded unworthy of continued worship with flowers.[7]
9. To the gazelle-eyed women, their association with wine became a hand-held saw to cut through the tight cord of love anger, a teacher in naturally graceful dance to the pair of eyes, and a robber of the judgement between right and wrong.[8]
10.  The pompous Flow of wine – animated by bees hovering on flowers/energized by Kama, characterized by deep redness/love, and readily gaining entry into the stomach/heart - kissed the sprout-like lower lips of the womenfolk.[9]
11.  One girl, rendered crazy by the revelry of drinking, saw the moon’s orb - its centre darkened by a deer-mark - reflected on the polished floor in front of her and fancied it to be a crystalline goblet decorated with a blue lily.
12.  Bit by bit, the celestial womenfolk’s tongue got to know the taste of wine with effort. But it was their nose that first appreciated the wine by sensing its sweet smell. 
13.  The fresh draught of wine that was being poured into many bejewelled, fanciful containers, resembled the first stream of coronation waters with which Emperor Kama, his limbs smeared with red unguents, was bathed.[10]
14.  Lo and behold, the wine created some special magic in that assembly of pretty-eyed damsels. Flowing incessantly from pitchers, it produced the illusion of a rainy downpour/a year in the tiny goblet/one small moment.[11]
15.  The protracted and straight stream of wine, falling from high above into the bejewelled cup, appeared like a fancy, coral-studded walking stick that hung down as Kama – the (grand old) instructor of women – strolled about his (heavenly) path.[12] 
16.  What greater praise must we openly heap on the wine since even the ladies’ tongue, dwelling in the midst of bright teeth/virtuous Brahmins as their inborn friend, endorsed it?[13]
17.  At that moment, it was one good thing after another for the flower-sucking bees in the assembly of young women, where they unexpectedly came across exquisite wine, decorated with plentiful blossoms, in the vicinity of lotus faces.[14]
18.  In the midst of the melodious musical bash, the appellation ‘bees’/’lovers’, used for youthful men, brimmed with significance as they gently grasped their sweethearts, possessed of breasts that resembled flower clusters, and sipped nectar/wine.[15]
19.  It seemed as if torrential streams of embodied love, disguised as gulps of wine, had gained quick access into the doe-eyed women’s bodies and washed away the thick dust of their love anger.[16] 
20.  The wine, dripping from the mouth of an upturned golden pitcher and swirling around in a hand-held goblet, seemed to circumambulate a pretty girl’s moon-face as the latter drew close to it.[17] 
21.  In the goblet, a cluster of mango flowers in fresh bloom took on the semblance of Bakula blossoms, thanks to its blessed association with the thick wine that trickled down after touching the tip of a maiden’s mouth.[18]
22.  A teeming swarm of bees approached the wine as if it were a stream of ichor – reddened by coming in contact with the vermilion powder rubbed over the frontal globes – of the majestic elephant that is Kama, and quaffed it all up, all the while humming a sweet song .[19] 
23.  During the drinking party of the celestial maidens, the goblet – droplets of wine adhering even to its outer surface – seemed to be covered in beads of sweat born of the perturbation caused by the touch of their fingertips. 
24.  As it entered into the mouths of the deer-eyed damsels, the draught of wine, led by a thick swarm of bees, appeared to cover itself with a dark veil, overcome with shyness by beholding the wonder that was the exhilarating elixir of their lips.[20]
25.  Though the wine in her fancy, golden goblet had been drunk up completely, a silly Pramatha maiden did not keep it aside since she thought it was completely filled up, thanks to the lustrous glow of her lower lip pervading it.
26.  The eyes of pretty-eyed lasses appeared like blue lilies when they were initially reflected in the wine although it took a lot of swearing (on the part of the lovers) to acknowledge their very presence (i.e., as reflection) in that wine after they turned red in due course.[21] 
27.  Encharmed by the noisy humming of bees and uninterrupted in its course due to the shattering of love anger, the wine appeared like Kama’s aquatic missile as it entered the interiors/heart of the pretty-eyed nymphs.[22]
28.  Thanks to the fresh wine, the women behaved with their co-wives as they did with their confidantes. And why not? Wine always imparts a state of equipoise to every being’s consciousness.[23]
29.  Since the doe-eyed women were bashful to begin with and sunk, as it were, into stupor at the end, it was only their intermediate state of intoxication, which alone made room for the expression of a wide variety of graceful mannerisms, that was enjoyable. 
30.  The wine in the goblets of the celestials, adorned with jasmine buds, appeared to be populated by Stars, intent on embracing the Moon who was mirrored in it.[24]
31.  By causing their eyelids to droop down slightly in an overwhelming sensation of singular ecstasy, wine made the long-lashed wives of the unwinking gods to wink their eyes by force, or so it seemed.
32.  After his sweetheart had entertained him, like she would a Bakula tree, by splashing him with mouthfuls of wine for fun, one certain youth cherished a long-standing desire to experience through her the Kurabaka tree’s Dohada ritual (of a close embrace).
33.  The celestial women’s wine sported the sliver moon’s reflection along with a flower floating in front of it as if it were the flower-arrowed Kama’s slender bow with an arrow fixed upon it. 
34.  In the wine, which resembled a molten stream of rubies liquefied by the fiery sunlight of Kama’s valour, new-blown jasmine buds presented an imitation of bright pearls.[25]
35.   Undoubtedly desirous of imparting their drink with the rich taste of ambrosia, the women transformed the (ambrosial) digit of the cool-rayed moon, defeated by an iota of their radiant countenance, into a soft jasmine bud and tossed it about in the wine.[26]
36.  The bumblebees hummed words of praise as they went around the Wine that (like a guru) obliterated the distinction between/removed confusions regarding right and wrong and acted as the sole keeper of Kama’s secret lore.[27] 
37.  The drinking party overruled even the Creator’s long-established mode of action. For, it presently heralded the glorious advent of nectar/wine even in the mouth-lotuses of lovely ladies.[28]
38.  Holding a goblet in her hand, a lady with tremulous eyes smiled at her lover, who was standing nearby, whereupon her row of teeth, reflected in the wine, put on the semblance of fresh, decorative jasmine buds.[29]
39.  Within the wine, a lively swarm of bees clinging to a close cluster of ornamental flowers appeared like a noisy battalion, stationed in a marine fort by Kama, whose courage crumbled in fear of Shiva.
40.  Undoubtedly, Kama overcame the scorching pain, which resulted from Shiva’s blazing ocular fire, by jumping into the stream of wine inasmuch as the bees hovering around took the form of wet, black cinders.[30] 
41.  Whitened by jasmines, which were abuzz with black bumblebees, and  enveloped in rays emitted by the golden goblet, the red wine created an illusion of Kama’s colourful canvas.[31]
42.  By lifting up a golden jug with her hand such that the wine fell into her mouth, one certain lady created a fancy new solar orb, whose Sushumna ray pervaded the hollow interiors of the full moon.[32]
43.  A line of blue lily petals placed in the goblets of the celestial courtesans endowed the moon’s reflection with several new black patches.[33] 
44.  Driven crazy by the recent revelry, a certain lady made her very own wine-filled mouth the lover’s drinking goblet with elongated eyes doubling up as blue lilies. 
45.  Through the fine filaments of blue lilies (adorning it), the red/impassionate wine in the goblets seemed to sport teeth marks on its person resulting from the kisses of the fickle-eyed celestial women.
46.  Deer-eyed damsels mistook the droplets scattered by the wine that flowed down rapidly from the brim of gem-studded goblets for a spray ejected by the lordly elephant called Kama and reddened by the powdered saffron adorning his temples. 
47.  A women from the heaven’s harem imagined that the Wine, Balarama’s favourite, assailed from above by swarms of bees, was being forcibly and freely stripped of its glory by the (dark) river Yamuna due to the latter’s intolerance towards Balarama.[34] 
48.  Since it was surrounded by winding trains of bumblebees, as if by guardian black cobras, Kama evidently regarded the wine as one of his treasures.[35] 
49.  The lower lips of the deer-eyed maidens seemed to be marked with kohl, thanks to the (black) bees lingering about the sweet aroma of their breaths. And their wine-shot eyes were heavily smeared, as it were, with the paste of Madana.[36]
50.  A lover removed his pretty-eyed beloved’s ruby earrings, whose brilliant glow was obscured by the deep red of intoxication spreading over her cheeks, and adorned her ears with golden earrings instead.
51.  Kissed vehemently by their paramours, the women, their eyes expanding in the ecstasy of love, trembled, seemingly because they had swallowed the cool-rayed moon reflected in the wine.[37]  
52.  In the company of the roving-eyed ladies, whose fancy attire was put to disarray by their stumbling gait, resulting from a fresh bout of intoxication, the youthful lovers got to see something which they had never imagined even in their wildest dreams.[38] 
53.  In the gem-studded goblets of gazelle-eyed girls, the wine - within which lingered a deer-like black bee and which tasted like ambrosia - resembled the orb of the evening moon, liquefied by the fiery heat of Kama’s valour.[39]
54.  The blessed Goddess Wine was indeed gracious towards the youths on her own accord, for it was due to her genius that the pretty-browed ladies abandoned their love anger, unrelenting though it was, and favoured them with passionate kisses.[40]
55.  The wine, which the dark-eyed damsels tasted before they did the lover’s sweet lips, caused their steps and speech to falter and infused their eyes and heart with deep redness/desire.
56.  Since his doe-eyed beloved was in a state of drunkenness, a youthful lover could not make out her anger, which was aroused when he made her co-wife sip wine, although she stuttered unintentionally and her face sported dancing eyebrows, red-shot eyes, and flushed cheeks.[41]
57.  The advent of intoxication triggered different emotions in different women: one of them, though angry, calmed down even before her lover could ask for it; another got mad without any reason and upset her sweetheart; and a third was in a state of equipoise, neither glad nor mad.
58.  As it reached a peak, one could scarcely recognize drunkenness as such: the round cheeks abandoned their rosiness and gradually turned pale; shutting eyes rendered questions about their tremulousness moot; and stuttered speech was replaced by silence.
59.  “O Moon! Even after being vanquished by my lover’s face, if you will still not lend me the deer on your lap for the sake of (i.e., to keep company of) my sportive deer, I shall imprison you within my cup by slamming another cup over it.[42]
60.  O Lord of night! Why does your body tremble as you freely wade your arms through the rippling wine in the goblet? Dear friend! How can your orb, that is as light as a Tumbi gourd, ever sink down?[43] 
61.  Deer-marked moon! Your kingship over Brahmins is natural. And you are, moreover, the supreme progenitor of the warrior clan. How then does it suit you to immerse yourself in goblets filled with the wine that is spat out (by us)?[44] 
62.  Deer-bannered moon! Since you are the lord of Brahmins, you must carefully steer clear of my goblet so the (seven) Celestial Sages do not loathe you because you smell of wine.”
63.  Thus letting their imagination run wild, the slender-limbed ladies - their languid, lithe bodies enlivened by the warm embrace of the lovers seated nearby and tremulous side-glances striking against the corners of the eyes in the dizziness brought about by drinking – freely addressed the Moon, who was mirrored in their wine.
64.  Every young lady’s face was flushed red due to the bonhomie of the prolonged wine bash, so much so her bloodshot eyes suddenly stood out even against the blue lotus tucked behind the ear.[45]
65.  The young lovers, who passionately made their pretty-faced women drink wine from orange peel cups, seemed to furnish beforehand a carefully thought-out counterexample for their luscious lips.[46]
66.  A certain lady, pretending to be in a drunken state, lay still. Meanwhile, her lover too kissed a co-wife without any apprehension whatsoever. Whereupon, as she became furious, he quickly calmed her down by saying “I did this to find out if you were drunk or not”. 
67.  And so, the women, exhausted from the merrymaking, raised their hand-held goblets languidly and offered wine along with the snacks of their succulent lower lips to the sweethearts. As they drank and drank the wine till the very last drop, their limbs exhibited such beauty, none in Kama’s assembly was erudite enough to describe it.
68.  The Wine – richly adorned with flowers/endowed with passion and immensely red/intensely desirous – easily gained entry into the celestial women’s heart/inner recesses. Kissing their lovely lips in the beginning, it seized their every limb, gave them goosebumps, shut their tremulous eyes, and led them close to ecstasy.[47] 
________________
[1]A drunken state leads to loss of inhibition, thereby aiding free expression of love. Mankha therefore describes wine as teacher of love’s foremost secrets (JR).
[2]Balarama’s fondness for wine is frequently described in Sanskrit literature; here, the poet imagines Balarama as hiding the wine due to the fear that somebody might steal it, which, in turn suggests the wine’s superior quality (JR).
[3]Mankha suggests the wine’s excellent taste by describing even inanimate goblets as craving for it (JR).
[4]The word ‘āsavadrava’ is in the masculine gender, thus lending propriety to the act of kissing by the maidens (JR)
[5]‘Hārahūraka’ is a rare word for wine
[6]Wine was born during the churning of the ocean. 
[7]The qualifiers of wine, such as ‘pratipāditasvakatanūḥ’ (‘sacrificer of one’s own body’), employed in this verse suggest its similarity with Bodhisattva (JR). Wine goblets are adorned with flowers. 
[8]Note the metrical license taken by Mankha in employing the word ‘prakāra’, which renders the syllable ‘tra’ that precedes the conjoint syllable ‘pra’ of prakāra’ short in spite of it being long. Pingala’s aphorism ‘prahre vā’ allows for such a usage. JR does not comment on this metrical peculiarity.
[9]‘Madhuḍambara’ (‘pompous flow of wine’), in masculine gender, is likened to a lover (JR).
[10]‘Kāpiśāyana’ is wine. Since wine is red in colour, Mankha likens it to coronation waters reddened by unguents
[11]“Caṣaka’ is a certain small measure of time, which is described in astronomical texts (e.g., ‘punarapi śeṣaṃ ṣaṣṭyā saṅguṇya tathaiva caṣakāḥ’, Bhattotpala’s commentary on Bṛhajjātaka, 7.12). Likewise, Mankha may have used ‘Kumbhaka’ also in the second sense of a time measure, though JR’s commentary doesn’t specify so.
[12]Since wine is red, its stream is compared to a coral-studded stick 
[13]Brahmins must abstain from consuming intoxicating drinks 
[14]The idea is that the bees were lucky to be in the midst of the wine, the flowers adorning the wine, and the lotus-faces of the ladies drinking the wine, all three of which they were attracted to. 
[15]The lovers behaved in the manner of bees, thus rendering the word ‘bhṛṅga‘, that means both ‘lover’ and ‘bee’,  meaningful.
[16]According to the Sanskrit poetic convention, love is red in colour. 
[17]It is appropriate to respectfully go around those who are more accomplished than oneself (JR).
[18] It is the Bakula, which, according to poetic convention, puts forth flowers when spit with mouthfuls of wine by women. In the verse, however, the mango blossoms in bloom have been equated with Bakula flowers because of their association with the wine tricking down from the mouths of women.
[19]Ichor is generally described as black in colour; however, since it is being compared with wine, the poet has skilfully endowed it with redness by associating it with vermilion  
[20]When one (here, wine) comes across another person (here, the elixir of lips), who belongs to the same class but is superior in merits, the former, being shy, approaches the latter by covering the face with a veil (JR).
[21]The idea is that the reflected eyes stood out against the red wine initially because of their dark colour but could barely be perceived apart from the background after turning red in intoxication (JR). 
[22]Missiles are consecrated with charms (JR) and shatter obstacles in their path before piercing the heart.
[23]The importance of wine in conferring a state of equipoise is discussed in Tantra texts (e.g., śivaśaktyupamardācca yajjātamamṛtaṃ param | tatpibenmadhupātraṃ yatsaṃsārārṇavatārakam || sāmarasyaṃ bhavettena tathānando mahān bhavet |, quoted from Udayākarapaddhati in Jñānadīpavimarśinī, chapter 10).
[24]The lightness of the wine is suggested through this description (JR). 
[25]Pearls and rubies are often combined together (JR).
[26]The idea is that the wine was rendered ambrosial by the (nectar-laden) jasmine bud adorning it (JR). 
[27]An enlightened master of a secret lore removes the ignorance of his disciples and is praised by them in turn. 
[28]Wine-laden lotuses are unheard of in the Creator’s creation (JR).
[29]The wine stands for water, the cluster of flowers for a fort, and the lively swarm of bees for a noisy battalion. 
[30]Cinders are formed when a burning object falls into water (JR).
[31]JR offers the alternate reading of ‘amita’ for ‘asita’ in the second line
[32]It is traditionally believed that the waning moon enters the sunray called ‘Suṣumnā’ (JR) to obtain the nourishment needed for its growth (‘candramāḥ kila sūryasya suṣumnā nāma nāḍikāmanupraviśya vardhate’ Vallabha’s commentary on Raghuvaṃśa 3.22). In this verse, the golden jug stands for the sun, the stream of wine for the Suṣumnā ray and the maiden’s face for the full moon. The poet aims to create wonder by reversing the accepted state of affairs and describing the sun’s Suṣumnā ray as entering the full moon (JR).  
[33]The moon has but a single spot but its reflection sported several of them.   
[34]Balarama had wronged Yamuna by dragging her with his plough when she ignored his order to come close so he could bathe (‘āgaccha yamune snātumicchāmītyāha vihvalaḥ || tasya vācaṃ nadī sātu mattoktāmavamanya vai| nājagāma tataḥ kruddho halaṃ jagrāha lāṅgalī || gṛhītvā tāṃ taṭe tena cakarṣa madavihvalaḥ |’ Viṣṇupurāṇa, 5.25.8-10). The idea is that Yamuna, masquerading as a swarm of bees, assailed the Wine, Balrama’s beloved (drink), since he had humiliated her in the past.  
[35]Cobras guard treasures. 
[36]Madana is a cosmetic paste (JR).  
[37]The trembling of love’s ecstasy is attributed to swallowing the cool-rayed moon reflected in the wine
[38]īkṣitumavāpuḥ matches with the English idiomatic expression ‘they got to see’
[39]The bee is akin to the black deer-like spot and the wine to the crimson moon at twilight, liquefied by the fire of Kama’s prowess. The poet fancies that the wine is ambrosial in taste because it is the liquefied moon, whose rays are ambrosial (JR).
[40]Mankha employs ‘prasannā’ in two senses: ‘gracious’ and ‘wine’ 
[41]Stuttering words, dancing eyebrows, red-shot eyes, and flushed cheeks are common to intoxication and anger alike (JR).
[42]Verses 59 to 63 constitute a Kulaka set
[43]The hollow Tumbī gourd is employed as a resonator in the Vīṇā instrument.
[44]JR gives ‘nakṣatra’ (‘star’) as one of the meanings of ‘dvija’ (the other being Brahmin), though this meaning is uncommon.  
[45]JR gives ‘sauṣṭhavāt’ for ‘gauravāt’. The idea is that the dark eyes, which, before drinking wine, did not stand out prominently against the blue lotus adorning the ears did so after turning red in intoxication.
[46]The idea is that the nectar of their luscious lips was superior to the wine served in orange peel cups. According to JR, a thing that is provided as a counterexample for something else is deficient in a certain way with respect to the latter. In this verse, the wine in orange peel cups lacks the superior taste of luscious lips.
[47]Mankha, by employing the trope called ‘samāsokti’ (‘condensed expression’) likens the effects brought about by wine (kissing, seizing limbs, etc.) to the behaviour of a paramour (JR). 


#========
Canto15


1. Holding the hand of lovers in theirs and reeling in drunkenness, the young women entered their respective abodes, the pleasant sounds of their anklets mingling with the hum of bees that followed them in the wake of the wine’s sweet aroma. 
2. Reaching the pleasure houses along with their sweethearts, the maidens sat on sportive beds, which were thickly heaped with floral decorations as though Kama had strewn them with his arrows beforehand.
3. The pleasure beds looked impressive with silk quilts covering their surface and fancy lamps burning in their vicinity, as if a piece of fresh slough, shed along with the hood-gem by the serpent that is Kama, had adhered to them.[1] 
4. As the doe-eyed maidens were being disrobed in the pleasure chambers, billowing masses of smoke released by the burning agarwood readily put on the appearance of dark screens.
5. In the pleasure houses, youthful couples, their bodies hidden under ripples of smoke rising high from (the burning) musk and camphor, seemed to have playfully plunged into the surging lake of love’s waters.
6. The ladies’ beds were furnished with stacks of portly pillows, resounding with the hum of bees attracted to their fragrance, as if they were the wheels, with clamorous rims, attached to Kama’s carriage as he geared up (for victory).[2]
7. Close to the youthful lovers’ pillows lay (wooden) pricks with folded betel leaves closely strung all along their length, as if they were Kama’s arrows, carrying on their person a stack of targets pierced through in one go. 
8. Appearing like the sword-wielding body guards of Kama, who was taking a nap after conquering the world, intoxicated bumblebees, adhering to the tip of many an ornamental blue lotus bud, were abuzz with activity on the mansion’s floor.[3] 
9. As the women rested at ease on their lovers’ folded arms, which served as pillows, a second garment was pulled over them by Kama’s orders, or so it seemed, through the rays emitted by the bejewelled canopy. 
10.  Exposed to view as the lovers removed the bodices covering them, the rounded breasts of the roving-eyed beauties seemed to gift the five-arrowed Kama, who was presently standing with his bow drawn, a sheaf of Champaka arrows through the shafts of rays reflected from their surface.[4]
11.  The maidens took of their bodice – that groped the slope of their breast; held tight to their arms/closely embraced them; and fitted their necks snugly/playfully seized them by their necks – but made their lovers perform those very actions.[5]
12.  The womenfolk’s pair of breasts, which was adept in donning the role of golden lotus buds, quickly flung aside the curtain-like bodice from its way, so the drama of dalliance could be enacted.[6]
13.  The exposed breasts of the ladies reflected the flames of fancy lamps, making it appear as if golden staffs were parting on both sides of Emperor Kama when he entered their heart, his palace.[7] 
14.  As young men stripped them naked by untying the blouses, squeezed them tightly, and scratched them with their nail tips, the breasts of the damsels seemed to be flushed red with anger by way of the thick saffron paste applied over them.[8]
15.  Seeing the state in which those pretty-lashed ladies were, their female confidants left one by one, covering their smiles with the hand.  And even the lamps (in the pleasure rooms), shaken by the breeze of their flowing skirts, were on the verge of leaving, or so it seemed.[9]
16.  Muttering a magical chant that took the form of flattery, a certain lover suddenly grabbed his beloved’s emerald girdle that appeared like a black serpentess guarding Kama’s golden treasure pot - her rounded buttocks.[10] 
17.  When a lover placed his hand over his beloved’s waistband to quickly pull it away, she forbade him in shyness. But her (forbidding) lotus-hand itself transformed into a mutually intelligible (i.e., to the lover and his beloved) manual sign language evolved by the trickster Kama.[11] 
18.  Just as the lovers - stealers of hearts - hastily robbed the timid women of their lower garments in secrecy, their Girdle realized that it was time for Kama, the king of passions, to wake up and made continuous noise.[12] 
19.  Even as a lover snatched away the robes covering them, the buttocks of a shy gazelle-eyed beauty seemed to conjure up, as it were, yet another set of coverings through their very own, ever-renewing glow. 
20.  The limbs of young couples, rendered weak by the ruthless squeezing and shaking with an unusually intense tremor, somehow came together in the overpowering passion of mutual embraces, notwithstanding their benumbing stupefaction.[13] 
21.  Thanks to love, amorous men were already united in their hearts with young girls. At present, though, the duo were united even in their bodies, stitched tightly together by Kama’s arrows, or so it seemed.  
22.  Sporting the armour of horripilation, the paramours, whose hearts were penetrated by the tips of women’s breasts/swords and Kama’s feathered arrows alike, donned the role of heroes in love’s battle.
23.  Thus were the youthful pairs squeezed together in an embrace, arms tightly intertwined around one another, that the stout pearls adorning their necklaces were reduced to a state in which they resembled the decorative ash of the lordly elephant called Kama.
24.  The sloping breasts of doe-eyed women are suffused with the natural warmth of youth and their pearl necklaces exhibit coolness throughout. When the two landed simultaneously on the chest of youthful men, Kama’s exhaustion, caused by cold and heat alike, was allayed.
25.  Desirous, as it were, of stitching the thread of love to the hearts of the gallants, who were tightly embraced by women with thighs plumper than plantain stems, Kama fashioned numerous needles in the form of hairs standing on end. 
26.  The heat of Kama’s prowess truly rests on the tips of women’s lofty, close-set breasts, wherefore, the young men’s frames were covered in copious sweat when they pressed their chests against them.[14]
27.  In order to bring Kama back to life, the full-moon faces of the lotus-eyed ladies poured forth heaven’s ambrosia, masquerading as the intoxicating elixir of their lips, which young men sipped repeatedly with intense desire.
28.  The erotic moans of the young maidens, whose frames were embraced by their lovers, attained softness in due course. At daybreak, pet parrots disclosed their love secret by mimicking those very moans in the presence of elders.[15]
29.  All the senses of the young men were absorbed in a state of unefforted composure resulting from the sport of lovemaking, wherefore, the hurried breaths of their beloveds were reduced to sounds falling on deaf ears.[16]
30.  The fresh nail-marks, which the women engraved with leisurely passion on the bodies of their paramours, appeared like dripping lines of vermillion, soaked in ichor, adorning the temples of the rutting elephant that is love.[17] 
31.  The breasts of the celestial full-moon-faced damsels were pronounced guilty of robbing the hearts of youths, wherefore, emperor Kama ordered for them to be subjected forthwith to the painful scratch of sharp nails.
32.  The king of emotions, Kama, verily transformed the cheeks of pretty-eyed women into royal wage decrees permitting enjoyment of the world/all carnal pleasures (by the lovers, standing for brave soldiers), whereupon, the fresh nail-marks of the lovers appeared on them like a row of saffron-tinged letters in Kama’s signature .[18]
33.  By darting their eyebrows up and down and biting the lips of their lovers hard with their teeth, the pretty ladies transformed the serene equanimity resulting from the ingenious lovemaking into a mirror image of love anger.[19]
34.  At the very commencement of her lovemaking session, a shy girl solved the problem of noisy ornaments by discarding them, though the very moan emitting spontaneously from her throat made it public that she was endowed with all the attributes of bold, beautiful women.[20] 
35.  Thus did a slender-limbed woman, having ascended the pinnacle of passionate intercourse, show her skill in the woman-on-the-top position, that even her hair bun, come loose by being pulled roughly, rained flowers on her continuously.[21]  
36.  And thus did a dainty-faced divine damsel determinedly engage in the enterprise of inverted sexual union that the row of her curly locks became a fancy palmyra fan for Kama, who was fatigued by the practice of archery.[22] 
37.  Pressed against each other in mutual kissing, the moon-like faces of an enamoured couple appeared like the two halves of a casket filled with Kama’s lifetime earnings.[23] 
38.  Thus did the young ladies appear during the woman-as-man sex, their hands stretched to grab the lovers’ thick tresses, glossy like the polished blade of a sword, that Kama added them to the list of his chief fighters.[24] 
39.  As sweat caused the red lac paint to drip, the heel of a certain lady, her limbs weakened by the strain of reverse coitus, appeared to be covered in sore wounds caused by her adventurous walk on a path that was strewn with Kama’s pointed arrows.
40.  As the love sports came to an end, the deer-eyed beauties stood still for a long time, their eyelids drooping and lips trembling, as if they were worshipping Kama’s sacred mantra through simultaneous contemplation and repetition.[25] 
41.  As the romantic couples everywhere betrayed the unusual and profoundly exciting experience they had gone through by closing their blue-lily eyes at the end of lovemaking, they seemed to melt away into one another through a profuse outpouring of fresh sweat, occasioned by irresistible desire. 
42.  Gleaming with beads of perspiration resulting from the thrill of their lover’s tight embrace, the buxom breasts of the ladies, whose long eyes resembled lotus petals, appeared like the round, pearl-studded gold earrings of Rati that had snapped and fallen off her earlobe while she was following behind Kama as he strolled about in leisure.[26] 
43.  Plunging time and again into the stream of love, the young maidens, their eyes closed, decorative designs washed away, and shaky frames sprouting closely-packed ripples of goosebumps, repeatedly upheld the universal standard of boundless beauty.[27] 
44.  Did a round pillow, overlain with a band of bright pearls that broke off just then (from a necklace), land by the foot of a lady’s pleasure couch? Or was it the Moon, who, having arrived on earth at that hour of singular passion, engaged in the women-on-the-top sex with the starry beauties of his harem?[28]
45.  Its knot undone in the wild frenzy of lovemaking, the women’s thick plait was tossed up over their shoulder. Adorned with a crest jewel, it looked like the expanded hood of the black cobra that is Kama, approaching them to greedily lap up their hurried, strongly fragrant breaths.[29] 
46.  The cosmetic application was rubbed off by tight embraces; every single piece of gem-studded jewellery fell apart in the spirited excitement; and handsome hair was ruffled. The womenfolk’s embellishment thus embraced ruin during the love sports even as it found its purpose in the enjoyment of the lovers.
47.  How strange! Those very lamps, whose lives were not cut short abruptly in the pleasure mansions even when the ladies, afraid of being disrobed by their zesty lovers just as the revelry of lovemaking commenced, hurled the blue lilies adorning their ears on them, were reduced to posthumous entities even when the same ladies fanned the hem of their garment to allay the fatigue of love sports.[30]
48.  As her friends dropped in one by one and, with a smiling countenance, let their eyes fall repeatedly on the pleasure bed, bearing the imprint of the red lac that had dripped off her feet, a certain girl, who, in a blend of shyness and coquettishness, kept pointlessly drawing lines on the ground with the tip of her toenail, was etched deeply in her lover’s heart.[31]
49.  Exhausted by the long-drawn sport of sex, which had grown intense with repeated practice, the men slept peacefully, making the doubled-up arms of the young maidens their pillows. The sound of musical instruments at daybreak became a new mantra of Kama, the family priest of ladies, to expel such men (from the community of lovers).[32] 
50.  Did Lady Night explicitly experiment with the woman-in-man position as she and the Moon made love to each other when the opportune hour for propagating the doctrine of blissful love thus arrived?  For, he was swinging from side to side on the surface of the Setting Mountain, standing for a pleasure bed, and she was on the top, her starry eyes contracting and the thick tresses of darkness dishevelled.[33]
________________
[1]The silk quilts stand for pieces of fresh slough and the lamps for hood-gems (JR).
[2]It is Kama’s victory when passionate couples engage in dalliance.  
[3]JR does not explain why the bees are like sword-wielding body guards. Mankha seems to liken the blue lotus buds to dark swords. Swords are often compared to blue lotuses in Sanskrit poetry (For e.g., ‘iyaṃ hi subhaṭakhaḍgamaṇḍalotpalavanavibhramabhramarī lakṣmīḥ’, Kādambarī).  
[4]The Campaka, like a maiden’s breast, is golden-hued. The word ‘five-arrowed’ (daśārdhabāṇa), employed for Kama, is significant (JR). The ladies described in this verse seem to donate a sheath of arrows to Kama because of the small number of arrows that he wields and the large number of lovers who are his targets.  
[5]‘Those very actions’ refers to groping, embracing, etc. (JR).
[6]The breasts are compared to actors in this verse: they don the role of golden lotus buds (i.e., they mimic golden lotus buds) and fling aside the curtain that is the bodice before the drama of dalliance begins.  
[7]Guards carrying golden staffs line up on either side of an emperor when he enters the palace (JR).
[8]One turns red in anger when one’s possessions, such as clothes, are snatched away (JR). 
[9]Thus did they freely engage in dalliance that even inanimate objects were overcome with shyness (JR) 
[10]One mutters a mantra to catch hold of a treasure-guarding serpent (JR).
[11]The idea is this: The lady described in this verse, though seemingly shy, wants the lover to remove her waistband so they can enjoy dalliance. Her forbidding hand gesture is therefore an invitation in disguise. Kama is described as a trickster because the gestures evolved by him carry an opposite meaning to what is generally understood from them.
[12]People make noise to awaken those in authority when they see thieves engaging in robbery.
[13]The idea is that weak, shaky things (limbs, in this case) cannot be joined together unless there is something else (stupefaction, here) to support them.
[14]Exposure to heat causes sweating (JR). 
[15]The description of parrots disclosing love secrets is commonplace in Sanskrit poetry (e.g., dampatyorniśi jalpatorgṛhaśukenākarṇitaṃ yadvacaḥ ---, Amaruśataka) 
[16]The men were so absorbed in the ecstasy of lovemaking that they paid no heed to the moans of their beloveds (JR).  
[17]The adverbial compound ‘manmatharasālasam’ (‘with leisurely passion’) indicates that the men were soft-limbed (JR).
[18]‘Bhṛtipatraka’ is a wage decree. In this verse, the enjoyment of carnal pleasures is the wage received by the lovers. Wage decrees bear the authority’s signature (JR) 
[19]The darting movements of eyebrows and biting of lips characterize lovemaking and love anger alike (JR) 
[20]The idea is that the girl, though shy by nature, exhibited boldness in the act of lovemaking. Bold women, who are skilled in the art of lovemaking, emit noises from their throat during dalliance (JR).
[21]Skilful persons are honoured by showering flowers on them. 
[22]The purport is that love was kindled in the youths when they saw the dancing locks of their beloved (JR). 
[23]JR suggests the alternate, better reading ‘samudgapuṭe iva dve’ in place of ‘samudgapuṭadvayīva’ to match with the verb ‘vibabhatuḥ’ that is in the dual number
[24]The idea is that the thick, glossy tresses of the lovers, grabbed by the women, appeared like swords in their hands, wherefore Kama regarded them as his chief fighters.
[25]The drooping eyelids and trembling lips indicate contemplation on and repetition of the mantra respectively. In the context of lovemaking, the lips tremble due to the pain caused by the lover’s teeth bite (JR).
[26]The pair of breasts, dotted with sweat drops, appear like Rati’s pearl-studded gold earrings.  
[27]In this verse, plunging into the stream of love is likened with plunging into water (JR). Closing of eyes, washing away of decorative designs, trembling of limbs, and sprouting of goosebumps also occur when one plunges into water.  
[28]The doubt expressed in this verse is based on the similarity between the round pillow and the moon on the one hand and between the pearls and the stars on the other. The purport is that the pillow overlain with pearls appeared like the moon, who, having come to earth, was enjoying woman-on-the-top sex with his starry wives.
[29]Snakes are supposed to be adorned with crest-gems and feed on wind
[30]The verse suggests the end of night. ‘Lamps, whose lives were not cut short abruptly in the pleasure mansions even when the ladies, afraid of being disrobed by their zesty lovers just as the revelry of lovemaking commenced, hurled the blue lilies adorning their ears on them’ is an indirect way of saying that the lamps were burning brightly at nightfall when the lovemaking commenced. Likewise, ‘were reduced to posthumous entities even when the same ladies fanned the hem of their garment to allay the fatigue of love sports’ is a roundabout way of saying that the flame of those very lamps dwindled away at dawn when the love play came to an end.
[31]By describing the pleasure bed as bearing the imprint of red lac that had dripped off the girl’s feet, the poet seems to suggest that she had practised the woman-on-the-top sex. The blend of shyness (at being found out by her friends) and coquettishness (due to the confidence resulting from the practice of the woman-on-the-top sex) adds force to this suggestion.  
[32]The idea is that the men brought their love sport to a halt at dawn. To desist from lovemaking is to breach the lover’s contract, leading to expulsion from the community of lovers. The sound of musical instruments at dawn is fancied as a mantra pronounced by Kama, the family priest of ladies, to bring about this expulsion. Uccāṭana is the act of banishing someone (including evil spirits) from their place by employing mantras (‘uccāṭanaṃ svadeśāderbhraṃśanaṃ parikīrtitam’, Śāradātilaka Tantra, 23.125)
[33]The verse suggests the end of night (JR) 


#========
Canto16


1. Thereafter, as the moon’s lustre started to fade away, the attendants of Shiva – who, accompanied by Parvati in the sportive bower of creepers, was once again favourably disposed towards Kama – sang the Lord’s early morning praise in words set to the cheerful melody of the Raga Bhinnashadja.[1] 
2. “O Rudra! Deny your eyes their sleep. Look how the glow of your shapely neck stands out prominently, now that darkness has dwindled. And, what’s more, yonder moon is submerged in water, wherefore the cool-rayed lunar digit that adorns your crest reigns supreme, free of competitors.
3. The moon, like a ball of foam, has melted away in the midst of the ocean. And the sun has not yet graced the East with his light. This indeed is the opportune time – when darkness solidifies for a moment or two – for the trysting long-eyed ladies to sneak out from their lovers’ homes.[2]
4. As the beautiful maidens set out from their lovers’ homes, their hearts are disinclined to let them place even a foot forward. Seeing their lovers’ faces repeatedly, they are so overcome by renewed longing that their limbs too, paralyzed completely, follow suit (i.e., do not allow them to place even a foot forward).[3] 
5. How strange that your various forms should thus differ mutually! The water in the ocean, the moon in the sky, and the hot breaths in the mouths of Chakravaka birds, whose lovelornliness has ended,  are beating a hasty retreat whereas fire, the sun, and the pair of heaven and earth show up in the sunstones, atop the rising mountain, and in the range of everyone’s vision respectively.[4]
6. Shiva! Behold these little pools of dewdrops, still persisting somewhat in every nook and corner of the earth; dewdrops, which were made lukewarm by the tears of female Chakravaka birds pining on the banks of lotus ponds.
7. Parvati’s Paramour! Look how the moon/Vishnu –  clearly exhibiting a deer within/lotus sprouting over his belly, his ray-tips given to making clusters of red lotuses close/feet pampered by Lakshmi’s loving massage – disappears into/sleeps beneath the sea even though it is dawn already.[5]
8. By the time the conch-necked beauties submit to their lovers with intense passion at dawn, when the light of lamps placed on the turret of pleasure mansions grows dim, the sudden glow of newly polished sunstones embedded in pillars nearby brightens up their surroundings thoroughly.[6] 
9. Welcomed, as it were, with a ritual waving of lamps through a web of (swirling) flames emitted by sunstones, the Sun – sovereign leader of celestial bodies – rises with renewed strength. And the moon – who had emerged at night to rob young women of all their facial charm – disappears into the mountain caves.[7] 
10.  The circle of stars that had long appeared like a heap of flowers scattered by divine damsels on the sky’s burnished floor is quickly swept away, or so it seems, by the breath of the Sun’s steeds, which are exhausted from their hasty arrival. 
11.  Where, may we ask, has the nectar-rayed Moon god – darling of the Triple World – gone now, abandoning his melting/weeping gems – the Moonstones? Presently, even the Sunstone, realizing that this is a time of separation from him (i.e., the Moon), gets ready to hurriedly set itself on fire.[8] 
12.  Yonder blows the morning breeze, proud owner of the rich fragrance which it procured from the awakening lotuses while enquiring of them if they had enjoyed a good night’s sleep. It readily sips away from Kama’s brow, streams of sweat, gathered in copious amounts from his all-night practice of vigorous archery.[9]
13.  Look how the Lord of light drives his inimitably swift chariot ahead as he commences to climb the Rising Mountain’s summit.  The lotus clusters seem to wake up all of a sudden on hearing the crushing noise produced by a stack of boulders when the chariot’s wheels rub against them.[10] 
14.  Lady Night, whose wine-filled goblet was the crimson orb of the rising moon, undoubtedly enjoyed a nocturnal revelry in the sky’s courtyard, thickly overspread with a floral bed of stars. And now, flushing red by way of the rising sun’s glow, she slips and falls on/retires from every road.
15.  Rise up from bed, O Lord of gods! Observe the row of night lilies in the pleasure pond nearby. With bees mumbling within and petals closing up/eyes shutting, they happily sing your praise, or so it seems, a bunch of newly sprouting buds standing for their cupped hands. 
16.  The Sun - a Mantra practitioner to cure the ocean of its seizures - causes the gaping channels of moonstones to fill up, quickly draws away the veil that covers the eyes of the world, and makes the mountain that adorns Indra’s direction his throne.[11] 
17.  Behold, O Lord, the freshly youthful sun’s pencilling rays. On the Rising Mountain’s summit, which imitates the buxom bosom of the Direction beloved to Indra, they take on the appearance of newly etched nail marks.
18.  Without a doubt, this hour of the day augments speech’s illumining light as it does the sun’s light everywhere. Master poets can therefore have an enduring vision of the entire cosmos now, as clearly as a jujube fruit held in their palm, thanks to the awakening of their lingual eye.[12]
19.  The ten directions that, like divinities, lay devastated, broken, and supportless throughout the night, when the monism of darkness reigned supreme, are now restored back to their previous glory by the almighty Sun-god’s rays, whose noble duty it is to illumine the triad of worlds.[13]
20.  The Lotus Species opens its floral mouth to seemingly help its lover, the Sun, by quickly gulping down darkness. For, within the lotuses can be seen so many scattered heaps of darkness disguised as invading swarms of intoxicated, closely packed bees.
21.  Gowri’s Sweetheart! Look in front of you. The Sun’s love for the Lotus is deep-rooted, going back to the very beginning of the universe. But I believe the Night Lily is his newly-wed wife since she just shrinks away, in spite of being accompanied by sweetly humming bees/sweetly persuading confidants, when the Sun attempts to embrace her for the first time with his long ray-arms.[14]
22.  With its long ray-trunk, the elephant that is the sun uproots enveloping darkness standing for a thicket of lotus leaves, studded with fragile starry dewdrops, turning the sky-lake’s expanse vermillion red in the process.[15]
23.  Look around, O Lord of eightfold form! The sun, one of your own forms, devours the dense darkness that had enveloped the directions, shutting the whole world down in a benumbing sleep like a flooding stream of the black Kalakuta venom, whose scattered drops, masquerading as bees within lotuses, torment the wayfarers.[16]
24.  Enriched with fragrance, the early morning wind wanders in the vicinity of lotus ponds, borne so very slowly by his deer-mount, which is keen on listening to the sweet and carefree songs of the bee swarms loitering around leisurely in the interior of the suddenly bursting lotuses.[17]
25.  How strange! Though the overpowering darkness, resembling a multitude of massive clouds, has cleared off; though the watery downpour that had made large moonstones wet has suddenly stopped, and though the dazzling display of colourful peacocks/the Saptarshi constellation has ended, the peacock/fire still dances ardently atop every sunstone.[18]
26.  The breeze blows here and there, swarmed by bees roaming around in passionate pursuit of the perfume emanating from freshly-blown lotuses, as if it had turned smoky due to the kindling of fire in sunstones.[19] 
27.  Uma’s Lovemate! Do not allow sleep to sully your (three) eyes any further. Let the triad of luminous beings enjoy long-lasting glory. Intent on rendering service unto you, the celestial tribe, led by Indra, waits outside with cupped hands as usual.[20]
28.  Ugra! This is Indra – foremost among the unwinking gods and ever victorious in war – standing prominently before you, his head bent down. He is the possessor of a thousand eyes, eyes that cringe from the dust raised by the gems in the headgears of the haughty Asuras when his Vajra weapon smashes them.[21]
29.  Indra – at whose feet, swarmed by bees adhering to the Celestial Elephant’s streaming ichor, the tresses of gods seem to be adorned with gems due to their contact with his gleaming toenails – stands in front of you. Pray honour him with a slight glance.[22]
30.  and 31. His hands cupped in supplication, Brahma, whose poetry is the triple Veda, devotedly sings your praises, O Lord of copious fame, causing the swans that pull his chariot to momentarily disappear with his deep voice that surpasses the rumble of clouds. Here he is. Seemingly intent on sporting in the precincts of his pure mind/Manasa lake, countless swans become his aerial cars and get paid an unforeseen salary, namely, a chance to savour the filaments in the stem of his lotus abode.[23] 
32.  Behold, O Bhava! Having attained fresh consciousness by being sprinkled with the ambrosia rippling forth from your crest-moon, Brahma’s fifth head makes an enquiry to the other four heads about something from your crown here.[24]
33.  Srikantha! The dark-hued Vishnu, who, from his foot, emitted the celestial river Ganga, interspersed with the streaming lustre of his body, as if she had been embraced by Yamuna’s bluish waters already in advance, prostrates before you at length. He is Indra’s companion, unmatched in the spotless fame resulting from transcending the triple world of matter.[25]
34.  O Lord, who is characterized by the crescent moon adorning the crown! Narayana bore the burden of the world on his limbs without forsaking his piscine nature/without making the Angas lose their Matsya status; and assuming a benevolent attitude, transformed himself into a tortoise/resting in the path of majestic waves, transformed himself into a tiny ripple. A source of ever-growing awe, he lies at your feet even after eliminating his enemy hordes.[26]
35.  Desirous of rendering service unto you, Skanda, like Vishnu, waits restlessly at your door, mounting his vehicle that is the foe of serpents. It was he - the sole possessor of the Shakti weapon/prowess – who conquered the realm of the Asura Taraka/stars with his indomitable wartime spirit/stride, made awe-inspiring by the issuing forth of the celestial army/Ganga.[27]
36.  Holy One! May this stealer of the saffron designs that adorn the breasts of Taraka’s wives (i.e., Skanda) incessantly gladden your (three) eyes. Overcome with intense filial affection, he boasts of twelve eyes to simultaneously behold as it were your elevenfold form along with Parvati (his mother).[28]
37.  Assuming the semblance of a saffron Tilaka mark in the centre of your forehead, Svaha’s Sweetheart (i.e., Fire) deprived Kama’s pretty-eyed consort of all her physical charm. See how he (i.e., Fire) bends deep before you now, annoyed by Ganesha with jets of water emitted from his trunk.[29]
38.  Alas! His body enmeshed in thick flames, Fire scorches the limbs of all your attendants with his heat. And they too, on their part, cripple his fiercely blazing form with a steady outpour of streaming sweat.[30]
39.  Look at the Wind god, O Hara, bending down before you. He avoids, from afar, his friend (i.e., Fire), whose form flickers with a fickle mass of flaming tongues, since the latter’s blazing exuberance (resulting from the Wind god’s proximity) could render Parvati exhausted, foiling thereby his earnest attempt at serving you.[31]  
40.  O Rudra! Bending his face down, Kubera sings your praises, who (i.e., Kubera), having hid boundless treasures in the womb of Mother Earth, leisurely strolls around (the places where the treasures have been hidden), protecting them, as it were, with the stamp of a vermilion seal, thanks to the mass of red light radiating from his feet.[32]
41.  O Lord, whose fancy garlands are serpents! Intent on offering service, your friend (i.e., Kubera), who, while entering the heaven each day, seems to furnish the sky with treasure pots, just as he does the nether regions, by way of the majestic golden bells tied close to one another from the sides of his steeply ascending Pushpaka chariot, stands before you.[33]
42.  Take a quick look at Yama, son of the Sun – friend of the lotuses – standing at your doorstep, armed with a staff, his entire countenance rendered fearful by a natural frown. For a moment, the gods think he is your door-keeper.[34]
43.  O Shiva, whose crest is adorned with a sliver of the moon – lord of night lilies! Pray reflect a bit on this curious observation: As you, who are affectionate towards your devotees, slowly cast your gracious glances, Yama, his limbs weak and floppy, withers away at a distance, remembering over and over again the agonizing pain he felt when the boundless flames of fire emanating from your eye lapped at him.[35]
44.  O Lord! Behold the peacock that is Skanda’s mount. Bending its body, it quickly grabs the lordly serpent that is Yama’s noose, desirous of devouring the latter as it slips from his (Yama’s) hand, shivering in the anxious fear of approaching you. The threesome (i.e., Yama, the serpent, and the peacock) are agitated for a long time now.[36]
45.  Look over here, O Vanquisher of Kama’s pride, at this presiding deity of the waters (i.e., Varuna) as he sings your fame that is bright like the full moon. Evening after evening, the Direction (i.e., the West) that is beloved to him holds up the sun’s orb in the manner of a golden Arati plate, furnished with a circle of lofty rays standing for sparkling Diya lamps.[37]
46.  O Lord! You have graciously taken sides with Varuna, ruler of waters, even in the past by bearing the Celestial River’s rushing waters on your crown respectfully. Even so, let him be cleansed of his sins by your merciful side-glances as he approaches you presently.[38] 
47.  Chandi’s Consort! Pray cast a few glances over here. Before you, stands Angiras’s child (i.e., Brihaspati), whose intellect Indra regards as subtle and, consequently, takes even the lotus’s filament that he was acquainted with during his stay in a lotus stalk, to be completely gross. Lavishing copious words in your praise, he assumes the office of a bard before you.[39]
48.  Triple-eyed God! Look hither. The (eleven) Rudras, their matted locks disheveled by rubbing across the ground, offer salutations to you, all at once. When their heads drop instinctively (in reverence), the moon’s digits (that are tugged therein) slide down. And Brahma’s geese lay their mouths on them thinking that they are lotus stalks.[40]
49.  O Lord! Husband of the Snowy Mountain’s daughter! The Rudras, having worshipped you with bright flowers through the crescent moons falling down from their bent crowns, now conduct a lamp-waving ceremony at your footstool with the blazing flames of the fire in their upwardly located eye.[41]
50.  Forging friendship with the light of the moons adorning the crest of these Rudras, the cool-rayed (half-)moon in your crown has started to suppress the sun’s radiant rays. The vast expanse of the universe is bathed in pure moonlight everywhere. Look how, as a result, the day is quickly hidden even as it just breaks into dawn.[42]
51.  Master! Stretching their coiled hoods forwards, now here, now there, the serpents, their gems shining like lamps, appear to be carrying lamp-stands with the purpose of serving you. Desirous of devouring the winds that blow from the innumerable fly-whisks dancing in the hands of the flurried Apsaras, they freely crawl close to Indra.[43] 
52.  O Girisha! Look at all these gods who constantly pay obeisance to the serpents though the latter cause them discomfort by endlessly spewing venom with each and every breath. This is so, because, the serpents, in spite of being born as the lowest of all creatures in the nethermost regions, have been raised by you to the loftiest position in the universe through the act of bearing them on your head, the foremost of all limbs.[44]
53.  O Shankara! Bending down before you in service, the Vidyadharas of both types – those who hold swords that appear like slivers of the sky, torn asunder during their swift ascent, and those who carry the very fruits of the ever-growing creeper of virtue, disguised as (magic) pills – do not lift their heads off the ground even now.[45]
54.  Behold, with eyes that expand in joy, the horse-faced Kinnaras as they sing. They are somewhat similar in form to your elephant-faced son. For a long time, Yama’s buffalo mount lets its eyes, their corners quivering in the full-blown anger contained within, fall again and again on them from afar.[46]
55.  Look at this strange group of horses/Gandharvas with your side-glances – horses/Gandharvas, whose bodies are wholly constituted by bridle bits/celestial; who bring joy to the heaven’s she-buffaloes/womenfolk; and who exhibit excellence of complexion and voice.[47] 
56.  O Lord, marked by the crescent moon (adorning the crest)! Your doorway seems to exhibit an all-embracing cosmic form. For, it is characterized by the presence of Devas somewhere, forges an alliance with the Nagas elsewhere, is occupied by Kinnaras – engrossed in singing – someplace, and betrays familiarity with the Vidyadharas (?) in a different corner.”[48]
57.  Listening to these words, which stood as testimonies of the speakers’ eloquent communication of the night’s passing, from the mouths of the bards, Shiva quickly abandoned his bed. His beloved, on her part, got out of the bed but continued her eternal repose in his heart.[49] 
58.  Fearing their tongues might get split once more, the serpents that served as Shiva’s ornaments did not lick the droplets (of nectar) raining down from Shiva’s fancy head-ornament - the sliver of the nectar-rayed moon – squeezed by Parvati as she seized his locks in the thick of a love battle, though, scattered by the morning breeze, the droplets had landed right on their mouths.[50]
59.  Driven by devotion, as it were, that Time of the day (i.e., the Dawn) rendered service to the moon-crested Shiva, master of the three worlds. It quickly scattered the stars, standing for flowers, in every direction; commenced to sing hymns, masquerading as the chirp of birds flocking together; placed a lamp, disguised as the sun, in the sky’s bowl; and bent its head – the moon’s round orb - way down in salutation.[51]


________________
[1]Bhinnaṣaḍja is an early morning rāga (JR). It consists of the notes ‘sa’, ‘ga’, ‘ma’, ‘dha’, and ‘ni’ and omits ‘pa’ and ‘ri’. It is derived from the jāti (sequence of notes) called Ṣaḍjodīcyavatī (ṣaḍjodīcyavatījāto bhinnaṣaḍjo ripojjhitaḥ | dhāṃśagraho madhyamānta uttarāyatayā yutaḥ ॥, Saṅgītaratnākara, 2.79). Magha similarly describes Krishna’s bards as singing this raga at dawn (śrutisamadhikamuccaiḥ pañcamaṃ pīḍayantaḥ satatamṛṣabhahīnaṃ bhinnakīkṛtya ṣaḍjam | - - - māgadhā mādhavāya॥, Śiśupālavadha, 11.1)
[2]JR prefers the reading pṛthudṛśāṃ (long-eyed) instead of mṛgadṛśāṃ (deer-eyed) since the former word also gives the additional meaning of ‘far-sighted’. Since the ladies were far-sighted, they sneaked out at the opportune moment.  
[3]Neither their minds nor their bodies permitted the ladies to take a step forward 
[4]The verse alludes to the various forms of Shiva, one set of which, including water, moon, and wind experiences a different plight than the other, comprising of fire, sun, heaven, and earth
[5]‘Kamala’ is a rare word for deer. It is also possible to split ‘kamalaṃ’ into ‘kam’ (‘water’) and ‘alam’ (‘abundant’). In that case, the meaning of the phrase ‘vyañjannigūḍhamudare kamalaṃ’, as applied to the moon, would be ‘clearly exhibiting abundant water within’. The moon is described in Sanskrit literature as being watery (e.g., ‘candro jalamayaḥ’, Siddhāntaśiromaṇi, Golādhyāya)
[6]The idea is this - No sooner did the ladies, abandoning their shyness at dawn, when the lamps grew dim, proceed to hug their lovers than their attempt was thwarted by the bright glow of sunstones. 
[7]The moon, a robber (of facial charm), hides in mountain caves when the sun makes his appearance like a king. 
[8]The idea is that not just the moonstone, but the sunstone (which belongs to the opposite camp of the sun) too was overcome with sorrow on account of its separation from the moon and got ready to immolate itself (JR).  
[9]The purport is that the cool touch of the morning breeze rekindled love in amorous couples (JR). ‘The breeze sips away streams of sweat from Kama’s brow’ is a roundabout way of saying ‘The breeze invigorates Kama’.
[10]The poet likens the blooming of the lotuses to their waking up, caused by noise of crushing boulders.   
[11]‘To fill up the gaping channels of moonstones’ is ‘to stop the moonstones from oozing water’; likewise, ‘to cure the ocean of its seizures’ is ‘to allay the surging tide of the ocean’
[12]Brāhmamuhūrta is a particular period in the early part of the day, about 48 minutes before sunrise. It is believed that this period is conducive for creative thinking (JR). Vide ‘gahanamapararātraprāptabuddhiprasādāḥ kavaya iva mahīpāścintayantyarthajātam’, Śiśupālavadha, 11.6. The ‘lingual eye’ is the ‘eye of poetic genius’. 
[13]The sun’s rays are compared to noble men who restore the dilapidated images of gods (JR). Does Mankha hint at the destruction of temples by wicked men through this verse (as he does in verse 3.62)?
[14] 
[15] 
[16] 
[17] 
[18] 
[19] 
[20] 
[21] 
[22] 
[23] 
[24] 
[25] 
[26] 
[27] 
[28] 
[29] 
[30] 
[31] 
[32] 
[33] 
[34] 
[35] 
[36] 
[37] 
[38] 
[39] 
[40] 
[41] 
[42] 
[43] 
[44] 
[45] 
[46] 
[47] 
[48] 
[49] 
[50] 
[51] 


#========
Canto17


1. to 4) Looked on with jealousy by Parvati, the Lord – who robbed the Tripuras’ wives of their fancy adornments, fashioned from saffron clusters – entered the hall for offering rituals to the goddess of dawn, (a hall) which was (seemingly) furnished with a marvellous gem-studded footstool by way of the solar orb’s reflection on the crystalline floor; whose white canopy was duplicated by the multitude of bright rays spreading forth from the moon adorning the crest (of Shiva); whose golden canes (i.e., the canes carried by Shiva’s attendants) were redoubled by the sun’s shooting rays sneaking in at infrequent intervals; the chants of whose numerous bards were muffled by the loud roar of the noisy waves surging up from the river (i.e., Ganga) on the (Lord’s) crown; which was effortlessly decorated with fresh flowers through the gems falling down from the headgears of the gods as they bent down in prostration; and where the ruffling plumage of Skanda’s peacock acted as an outspread palmyra fan.[1]
5. Possessed of a form which was not blanketed by snow/garlanded with snakes and (yet) quelled the heat of agony, thereby accomplishing an astonishing feat, Parvati’s dearest partner entered the wondrous hall at daybreak, (a hall) that was filled with the Ganas and stood foremost among all things valuable/comprised of all grammatical classes of verb roots and (yet) had (only) the class of verb roots starting with ‘div’ as its essence.[2] 
6. It seemed as if the horde of Pramathas - their entire bodies reflected in the floor (of the hall), which was equipped with a vast, raised platform - had entered the nether region to continually bear Shiva’s feet upon their heads with utmost devotion.  
7. Shiva brought his ornamental human skulls back to life with the nectar of immortality trickling down from crest-borne crescent, dissolving in the heat of the ocular fire, only to quickly rob them of their luck with the venomous breaths of the snakes forming his bracelets.[3]
8. His pair of lotus-feet resembled his lofty matted hair since its weight was firmly borne by the earth/serpent (used as a hairband). And he possessed a shapely neck that regularly appeared like his arm since it was marked by poison and sturdy/muscular with raised shoulders.[4]
9. Beholding with the corners of his eyes the faces of the celestial bards who were eagerly singing his praise, the Lord entered the hall of the Pramathas and sat down comfortably on the dainty seat.[5] 
10. Bathed in the lustre of his emerald seat, all the limbs of Shiva sported a greenish blue hue, thereby attaining kinship with his neck though they were decorated with fresh ash. 
11. Eager to wait upon Shiva, his attendants placed a footstool before him. But it was a fruitless exercise since the thick tresses of the saluting gods themselves served its (i.e., the footstool’s) purpose in quick succession.
12. In his vicinity, the female attendants never once waved the tip of their flywhisks fast, afraid they may cause the fire on his forehead to blaze up all of a sudden and melt the moon adorning his crest.
13. Ganesha plucked the crescent moon from the tip of his father’s matted crown and fixed it in the place of his other (broken) tusk. However, he only ended up breaking even his intact tusk, bathed as it was in mighty streams of moonlight.[6]
14. And so all the gods, their heads bent in humility, entered quietly and unpretentiously in as Nandi announced something to them with disdain.[7]
15. Thereafter, the gods, whose food is ambrosia, prostrated in unison before the triple-eyed Shiva from far. The world (i.e., humanity) undoubtedly makes its heads the footrests of those who place the Lord’s feet upon their heads.[8]  
16. What a surprise! Though the eyes of Puras’ foe are constituted by the hot-rayed sun, the blazing fire, and the frost-rayed moon, they fell freely on the persons of all the gods to allay their burning sorrow and cold sluggishness. 
17. Duly occupying their respective seats and enquired by the moon-crested god about their welfare, Indra, the killer of Namuchi, and the other gods spoke thus in words that were naturally sweet, due, as if, to their acquaintance with ambrosia.
18. “Since you constantly dwell in each and every body, the wise call you the body-dwelling ‘Purusha’. Therefore, is there anything in this world that is hidden from you, whose imperishable eyes are the three luminaries (i.e., the sun, moon, and fire)?[9]
19. O Universal Self! It is indeed true that your form, which eludes description, is unitary and elementally pure like the water of Ganga; but it also exhibits an artificial division in to the three streams constituted by the forces of creation and the like (i.e., sustenance and annihilation).[10]
20. O Purusha - Conscious Being! Fie upon those fools who falsely claim that you, the lord of the three worlds, are characterized by aloofness. If Prakrti – Primeval Matter – is indeed an independent agent, let us see if she can somehow bring about a state of Kaivalya - absolute solitude - without associating with you.[11]
21. O Hara! Why does the world use the word ‘Tattva’ - ‘principle’-  in vain with respect to the intellect and the like that are all of the nature of modifications? O Purusha! It is you alone – the twenty-fifth (principle) – possessing a form that is not subject to alteration, who truly merits the word ‘Tattva’.[12]
22. O Lord, who dwells on the peak of the Mountain King! What power, may we ask, do we possess for doing or saying anything before you? For, it is you who takes form of the unbroken word (‘Sphoṭa’) everywhere and the triple world is an apparent manifestation of you, whose body is constituted by sound (‘Dhvani’).[13] 
23. All-pervading Lord! The thread of logical argumentation is as follows: Nowhere does space suffer restriction (i.e., it is all-pervasive); sound never ceases to be its (i.e., space’s) quality; and it (i.e., sound), in turn, is your form. Therefore, you pervade the worlds.[14]
24. There is no object that can be demonstrated as existing outside cognition. On the contrary, it (i.e., an object) itself proceeds from cognition in its myriad form. Given that the Lord is of the nature of cognition, even the Buddhists cannot negate your omnipotence. How sad![15]  
25. What they (i.e., the Buddhists) mean by the word ‘Shunya’ is not an empty, unsubstantial form but one whose plurality of manifestation cannot be comprehended by people like us. And since your form fits this description, the Buddhists, truly speaking, have been glorifying you and you alone on every occasion.[16] 
26. O Lord with three eyes! Let there exist other philosophical schools that believe in your unboundedness because you are of the nature of cognition. Even the Jaina deserves no condemnation (i.e., even the Jaina accepts your all-pervasiveness) going by this (argument): you are the Self, your body is the triple world, and you are of the same size as the latter.[17] 
27. O Shiva! Since the Charvakas describe that, which differentiates the universe of myriad forms and that, from which all the living beings emanate, as ‘innate nature’, you have been accepted (even) by them in a roundabout way.[18]
28. All-pervading Lord! He, whom Maya – unrestrained by nature – cannot approach from anywhere and about whom wise men speak in exclusionary terms such as “not this” and “not that” is, in summary, proclaimed by the Upanishads as being identical with you.[19]
29. You alone, O three-eyed Master, are understood as the Light that is capable of acting on and knowing the three worlds. Despite the existence of duality, Reflective Power does not taint you with the blemish of difference since she is in unison with your form.[20]
30. O moon-crested Shiva, who has accomplished the duty of a poet as regards the Vedas (i.e., whose poetry are the Vedas)! You have indeed been (unwittingly) accepted as the doer of everything and the annihilator by the knowers of the Vedas (i.e., the Mimamsakas), according to whom Vedic command that takes the sole form of action enjoins relinquishment of (agential) control and freedom from desire.[21] 
31. Everything springs to life, leaving behind its stupor, even when sprinkled with a mere drop of your effulgence. Alas! The followers of Kanada do not feel any shame in claiming that you, O Conscious Self, are inert.[22]
32. O Lord, who is older than the whole universe! Where would this world of beings have dwelt, how could it have manifested into view, or how could it have breathed if, out of compassion, you would not have become its eight-formed master ever since the dawn of creation?
33. Mura’s foe, Vishnu, got his face (back) because of you and you lopped the lotus-born Brahma’s neck off. O Lord, whose crest is adorned with the cool-rayed moon! You therefore exhibit neither favour nor anger while dealing with the great”.[23]
34. In this way, when the immortals were chanting such praises aloud, the crescent-crested Shiva, overflowing with an abundant outpour of unprecedented compassion, spoke to them in words marked by liveliness. 
35. “Having gathered in my presence, you betray a great calamity by your attitude that is shorn of all confidence. And therefore, deprived as you are of your bright glow, your (dull) faces mimic the moon at dawn.  
36. Why do your faces tremble in troublesome trepidation though you yourselves are the physicians who cure the universe of its malady? O gods, who are eager to fight your enemies! Your fiery valour shall indeed match the submarine fire’s blazing lustre if it tides over despair.[24]
37. Though the stillness, which used to avowedly characterize the eyes of Brahma in his meditative trance, is intensified at present due to his worry, it does not delight me anymore.
38. Why is Vishnu’s discus – in front of which the severed heads of the spirited enemies used to put on the appearance of Death’s food bowls – listless with the spread of even its leading flames rendered feeble?
39. Why does Indra’s body, in which – distinguished by a thousand, continuously blooming eyes – Goddess Shri resides forgetting the lotus pond, throw everyone into a recurring bout of  doubtful uncertainty all of a sudden?[25]  
40. The Wind gods reveal their helplessness through limbs that are overcome by a strange sort of emaciation but they also swell up once again with their deep, sorrowful sighs.[26] 
41. Why is the Sun’s frame so endowed with paleness and why has it so abandoned its mantle of fiery lustre that it causes panic among the Chakravaka birds by creating a false impression of the moon even when it is not night time? 
42. Where has the world-devouring, natural radiance of the Fire god’s form disappeared? Alas! Why do we see his fiery energy reduced at present to a mere hot sigh of distress? 
43. The Lord of the West (i.e., Varuna, the god of waters), who used to boast of an indomitable radiance that resulted, as it were, from usurping the rays of the sun as the latter slid down the Setting Mountain every day, now exhibits his power (merely) through water-laden eyes.[27]
44. As regards the other gods too, where, may I know, is their previously plentiful glow gone? Or has it somehow died out like a lamp, thanks to the sighing breaths that flow from their mouths in unbroken succession?”[28]
45. The agony of their heart allayed somewhat by words such as these, uttered by Shiva, the sole magician who restrained the makara - sea monster - that is Kama (also ‘the sea monster that is Kama’s banner’), the gods stood still for a brief moment, holding their heads up somehow but avoiding eye contact due to their sorrow.[29] 
46. Thereafter, Lord Brahma, the poet-composer of the Vedas, spoke the following words with respect in a voice that rivalled the thunder of clouds, causing thereby a momentary alarm in the swans pulling his chariot.[30]
47. “Three-eyed Lord! Presently, there exist three Daityas, enemies of the three worlds, who, like the three limbs of the fever afflicting the minds of the gods, cause distress/elevated heat in everyone and escape reasoning.[31]
48. Overthrowing the Celestial Sages through their actions that were initially replete with practices such as the control of the mind and the body, they came together and performed penance without a break, having taken a firm decision to please me.[32]
49. As their penance started to evidently trouble the three worlds in the manner of the apocalyptic fire, I revealed myself before them with utmost graciousness and in all plainness. 
50. Having made my appearance, I soothed their bodies, heated up by the excessive penance, with the breeze blowing from the wings of the birds that pull my chariot and spoke aloud to them with hurried excitement as they stood before me with folded hands.
51. “Dear sons! Your physical frames have been completely trimmed down by the sharp blade that is this uniquely arduous form of penance. There is no need to practice vows (any further), for I am ready to grant you your cherished boon.[33] 
52. State the object of your desire, for obtaining which you engage in a gamble (with me) by making such protracted penance your bet. Fear not, O Crest Ornaments of Diti’s lineage!”
53. Having given ear to this talk of mine, they spoke to me thus, their eyes moist with tears of joy, heads bent down, and profound utterances brimming with humility in each and every syllable.[34]
54. “O Conferrer of boons! What is the use of obtaining so many other boons – boons that would make no difference even if they had not been obtained? O Lord! Let us (therefore) be granted immortality this very moment through a stream of ambrosial words emanating from your mouth.” 
55. “There exists no one who is capable of granting this (boon). So, decide soon and ask for another boon” – lending their ears to these words of mine, they once again spoke with reverence as follows -
56. “If you cannot promise this to us readily, even though we have been exhausted by performing continuous austerities, then let a single arrow, discharged by our enemy in battle, bring about the simultaneous death of all (three) of us”.[35]
57. Having obtained this powerful boon from me in order to cleverly evade Yama’s plans, they actively engaged in fresh efforts to attack the three worlds one by one.
58. Thereafter, having grasped the unified import of their minds, Maya, whose immense knowledge in the domain of artisanship is unshakeable, constructed (three) separate cities for them in the three worlds, (cities) whose vast expanse was (separately) fashioned with gold, silver, and iron.[36] 
59. And so, Tarakasha occupied the magnificent city made of gold, which, by dint of the copious rays radiating from its grand, ruby-studded towers, seemed to be surrounded by a newly erected rampart of fire and whose latticed windows seemed to be adorned with blue lilies, thanks to the side-glances of the Daitya damsels (peeping through them).[37]
60. Kamalaksha established his dominion in a different city, which, by way of the bright rays beaming from it, seemed to be smiling in the sky – remarkably similar to its (i.e., the city’s) own self because of the white cluster of stars/mansions adorning it – and which, like the exuberance of his heroism, laid claim to a silvery glow/royal glory.[38] 
61. Thereafter, Vidyunmali/a cloud wreathed in lighting, freely bathed a provincial city in the world of mortals with a stream of his sword’s liquid lustre; a city, which, on account of being fashioned from dark iron, seemed to have turned black by coming into close contact with the darkness springing forth from the nether world when the earth’s surface gave way under its weight.[39]
62. Famed as “Tripura”, they stayed put for hundreds of thousands of divine years, tormenting the worlds like some universal untimely death. Merely on hearing their (collective) name, the limbs of celestial ladies attain similitude with creepers that tremble in strong winds.[40]
63. Like the three incensed bodily humours, they presently cause sorrow/ fever, loss of splendour/appetite, and different types of pain to the world. O Bharga! If at all there is a physician who can deal with this morbid emergency, that physician is none other than your grace.[41]
64. The heavenly Santanaka creepers, which could not tolerate being licked even by the lukewarm flames of the fire emanating at midday from the sunstone ornaments adorning the wives of gods, are so tossed around at present by their (i.e., the Asuras’) soldiers that even a wild fire could perchance protect them from this insufferable shame.[42]
65. Their necks bound with serpents doubling as ropes and their flow of ichor dried up, the Quarter Elephants stand under the trunks of uprooted celestial trees that serve the purpose of tying posts. Put to work in the Asuras’ courtyards during the different shifts of the day, they keep their heads bent very low in painful shame though the burden of the all-bearing earth has been lifted off them.[43]
66. O Lord with a triad of eyes! What more can I say? Thus do they attack the universe without control, the steady breeze of their royal flywhisks augmented by the (sorrowful) sighs of celestial maidens, that they regard the terrestrial and celestial abodes as devoid of heroes and will surely reduce our realm to a mere nominal existence very soon”.
67. In this way, as Brahma, the director, finished uttering these introductory words, the actor called “Anger” entered the stage, namely, the heart of the assembled Ganas, after hastily tossing the curtain of their calm countenance far aside and exhibited an extraordinary repertoire of gestures – of the hands and so on.[44]
________________
[1]Galvarka is a rare word for crystal; JR gives ‘nṛtta’ as an alternate reading for vṛtta. In that case, ‘acted as an outspread palmyra fan’ must be replaced with ‘fluttered like an outspread palmyra fan’.
[2]The verse employs the trope of apparent contradiction effected by pun. JR contests the opinion of certain others  on the meaning of ‘divādisārām’. As against JR, who regards ‘divādisārām’ as a phrase formed by two different words, namely, the indeclinable ‘divā’ and the qualifier ‘ādisārām’, these others explain it as a compound whose component words are ‘divādi’ and ‘sārām’ and that means ‘eminent in the heaven etc. (i.e., in the three worlds, starting with heaven)’. According to JR, such an explanation is wrong on two accounts. Firstly, there is the word ‘div’, meaning ‘heaven’, which, if compounded with ‘ādi’ could become ‘divādi’. But such a possibility is checked by the rule ‘diva ut’ that specifies the transformation of ‘div’ into ‘dyu’. Therefore, ‘div’ cannot appear as it is when compounded with ‘ādi’. Secondly, although there exists an independent word ‘diva’ that also means ‘heaven’ and can be compounded with ‘ādi’ without the need to undergo any transformation, eminent poets (including Mankha) never employ it.   
[3]The skulls that were brought to life by the flow of ambrosia were quickly deprived of it by the venomous breaths of the snakes. JR identifies the poetic trope in this verse as ‘pratiprasavālaṅkāra’, which is described by Shobhakara as ‘the recurrence of something that had ceased to exist’ (‘pratyāpattiḥ pratiprasavaḥ’, ‘nivṛttārthasya punaḥ prāptiḥ pratyāpattiḥ’, Alaṅkāraratnākara, sutra no. 85 and the explanation under it). In this verse, the skulls that were delivered from their lifeless state by the ambrosia were once again subjected to it by the venomous breaths of the serpents. 
[4]dṛḍhataramahyupoḍhabhāram must be split in two different ways in order to get the two different meanings: dṛḍhataram+ahi+upoḍhabhāram and dṛḍhatara+mahī+upoḍhabhāram. JR’s commentary isn’t much useful in explaining these two meanings.
[5]Verses 5 to 8 for a Kulaka set (JR) 
[6]According to a rarely employed poetic convention, the tusks of elephants break when moonlight falls on them. Ganesha has a single tusk, whereby one of his names is ‘Ekadanta’.
[7]‘With disdain’, because Nandi, being the attendant of Shiva, the lord of the universe, doesn’t care much for lesser gods 
[8]The idea in the second half of the verse is that people bow down before those who bow down to Shiva.
[9]The etymology of the word ‘puruṣa’ is ‘puri dehe śete’ (‘one who dwells in the body’). By praising Shiva as all-knowing, the gods hint at the very commencement of their speech that he is aware of their sad plight, caused by the Tripuaras, too (JR).
[10]The naturally pure water of Ganga too is essentially one though it seemingly divides into three streams that nourish the triple world (JR).
[11]This verse attacks the Sāṅkhya doctrine of an active Prakṛti that is independent of Puruṣa, who is described as aloof. The gods ask: If material Prakṛti possesses independent agency, why doesn’t she liberate an individual from the cycle of birth and death all by herself, without the help of conscious Puruṣa? The overall purport is that matter’s apparent dynamism and agency result from its association with consciousness, which, in fact, is the actual agent. This line of thought is in keeping with the tenets of the Trika philosophy, according to which Universal Consciousness as Shiva, uses it powers to both bind itself in and free itself from saṃsāra as part of its divine play. JR comments – ‘Prakṛti cannot even bend a blade of grass without you, what to speak of creating the three worlds’.
[12]This is again directed at the Sāṅkhya doctrine, which recognizes 25 principles, of which 24 are part of the ever-changing Prakṛti and the 25th is the unchanging Puruṣa. According to the gods, the word ‘tattva’ (‘principle’) is too very significant to be applied for entities that keep changing. It is only the unchanging Puruṣa, who merits to be called ‘tattva’. JR reads ‘niravadhi’ (‘unbounded’) in the place of ‘nirupadhi’. 
[13]This verse alludes to the Śābdika school of philosophy. Sphoṭa or Śabdabrahman is an eternal, all-pervading, and unmanifest word that becomes manifest through temporal and limited sound, called dhvani, and transforms into the non-real universe in the process. The purport of the verse is that Shiva is both the unmanifest sphoṭa and the dhvani that manifests it. The gods say that they are rendered speechless and bereft of agency before Shiva because, as sphoṭa, he represents speech in its most fundamental form and as dhvani, he is the agent of the entire creation.
[14]It can be proved that Shiva is all-pervading through the Nyāya method of logical reasoning too. According to logicians, space is all-pervading and its distinguishing attribute is sound (‘śabdaguṇakamākāśam | taccaikaṃ vibhu nityaṃ ca’, Tarkasaṅgraha). Since sound exists in an inherent relationship (samavāyasambandha) with space, it too is all-pervading. And finally, Shiva himself is all-pervading because he is of the nature of sound. The use of the word ‘vibhu’ (all-pervading/master) for addressing Shiva is 
[15]According to the Vijñānavāda school of Buddhist philosophy, cognition alone is real and the world of plurality proceeds from it. Since Shiva is of the nature of cognition, the Buddhists have no other option than to agree that he creates the universe (JR).
[16]The Śūnyavāda school of Buddhist philosophy regards everything as empty and bereft of any essence. However, the gods turn this notion on its head by providing a novel interpretation of the word ‘śūnya’ as that which is so subtle, its plurality of expression cannot be comprehended by those with limited vision. Since Shiva’s form fits this description aptly, the gods argue that the Śūnyavādins have been glorifying Shiva all along under the garb of  declaring everything as empty.
[17]According to the Jainas, the size of the self is commensurate with the size of the body: the self of an ant is smaller compared to that of an elephant. Since Shiva is the Self of the universe, which is his body, even the Jainas must admit that he is all-pervading (JR).
[18]What the Cārvākas designate as ‘svabhāva’(innate nature) is no different from Shiva because, like him, the former too is described as the creative force behind the world of plurality (JR).
[19]This verse presents the viewpoint of Vedānta. He, whom the Upaniṣads speak about in exclusionary terms such as “He is not the vital breath”, “He is not the body”, and so on, is, in essence, none other than Shiva (JR). 
[20]According to the Trika school of philosophy, the Light of Supreme Consciousness (‘Prakāśa’) is always accompanied by the Power of Self-reflection (‘Vimarśaśakti’). The association of Consciousness with the Power of Self-reflection doesn’t engender duality just as it does not in the case of fire and its power to burn. JR’s commentary for this and the 4 verses that follow is not available. 
[21]This verse is directed at the Mīmāṃsakas. If one must give up agency and desire while performing an action ordained by the Vedas, there must exist someone to whom they can be attributed. This someone, according to the gods, is none other than Shiva, for he is the universal doer. ‘Viyoga’ must be read as ‘niyoga’. Niyoga is a technical term in Pūrvamīmāṃsā and refers to a Vedic command. Mankha uses this word elsewhere too in its technical sense (25.67). If ‘śrutikavi’ is taken to mean Brahma, as in verse 46, where he is similarly described as ‘śrutikavitā’, ‘nirvyūḍhaśrutikavikṛtya’ will have to translated as ‘(O Shiva), who has accomplished the purpose of Brahma, the poet-composer of the Vedas’. Since Shiva is the universal doer, he renders the Vedas, which enjoin the performance of certain actions, fruitful, thereby fulfilling the purpose of Brahma. 
[22]This verse targets the Vaiśeṣika  school of philosophy. According to this school, consciousness is not an essential quality of the self but emerges in the latter because of its contact with the mind (manas) (‘vaiśeṣikā āhuḥ - prāgaprakāśasya jaḍasyātmano manaḥsaṃyogājjñānākhyaḥ prakāśo jāyata iti’, Sāṅkhyapravacanabhāṣya, under sutra 145)
[23]The story of Shiva plucking off Brahma’s head is well-known (ciccheda bahuśo devo brahmaṇaḥ pañcamaṃ śiraḥ’, Śivapurāṇa, 7.1.30.19). However, the story of Shiva granting a head to Vishnu is an obscure one. The Skandapurāṇa (Dharmāraṇyamāhātmya, chapter 15) describes the story of Vishnu, as the horse-headed Hayagrīva, getting back his original head by performing austerities at Dharmāraṇya, a holy site dedicated to Shiva in his form as Mokṣeśvara (‘tīrthasya mahimā rājanhayaśīrṣastadā hariḥ | śubhānano hi sañjātaḥ pūrveṇaivānanena tu ||, 15.49). Mankha probably alludes to this story. 
[24]An alternative reading takes ‘vilaṅghyadainyam’ as a single word that qualifies ‘tejaḥ’ (JR). In that case, the translation would be ‘Your fiery valour, which can tide over despair’.
[25]Other lotuses bloom during the day but close at night but Indra’s lotus-like eyes are always awake (JR). Goddess Lakshmi therefore regards Indra’s body as a superior dwelling place in comparison to usual lotus ponds. JR commentary is not available for the second half of the verse.  
[26]An instance of the poetic trope pratiprasavālaṅkāra
[27]Varuna’s lordship over waters is now restricted to having watery eyes (JR).  
[28]The sighing breaths are imagined as extinguishing the lamp of the gods’ bodily glow.  
[29]To restrain the makara is to figuratively restrain the power of Kama himself since it is his banner. 
[30]The idea here is similar to the one in 16.30. According to Sanskrit poetic convention, swans are disturbed at the sight of clouds. 
[31]Fever is personified as a being with 3 legs and 3 heads that was born from the anger of Rudra (‘jvarastripādastriśirāḥ’, Harivaṃśa, 110.56; ‘dakṣāpamānasaṅkruddharudraniḥśvāsasambhavaḥ jvaraḥ’ Mādhavanidāna, 2.1)
[32]Control of the body is called ‘yama’ and includes practices such as cleanliness; control of the mind is ‘niyama’, involving practices such as non-violence
[33]‘khalu’ is used here along with the ktvānta indeclinable ‘viracayya’ (vi+rac+ktvā) in the sense of  prohibition according to the rule ‘alaṅkhalvoḥ pratiṣedhayoḥ prācāṃ ktvā’ (JP).
[34]JR provides ‘rasokṣaṇakṣaṇāḥ’ as an alternative reading for ‘rasokṣitekṣaṇāḥ’ 
[35]The ātmanepada usage in pratiśṛṇute is due to the rule ‘pratyāṅbhyāṃ śruvaḥ’ (JP)
[36]Maya is the son of  Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods (JR).
[37]Tarakaksha’s golden city occupied the nether region of Pātāla (JR). 
[38]Kamalaksha’s silver city occupied the celestial region. The poet employs pun to compare this city with the sky and the Asura Kamalaksha’s royal glory.  
[39]Vidyunmali’s iron city occupied the world of mortals. The sparkle of a sword’s edge is often equated with water in the Sanskrit poetic tradition. 
[40]‘Tripura’ stands for the cities as well as their Asura lords taken together. 
[41]The 3 bodily humours are known as ‘vāta’, ‘pitta’, and ‘kapha’. Though they are commonly known as ‘doṣa’, the word ‘dhātu’ can also be used for them (‘vātapittakaphā ete trayo doṣā iti smṛtāḥ || te dhātavo:'pi vidvadbhirgaditā dehadhāraṇāt |’, Bhāvaprakāśa, 1.1.3.100-101). Their combined aggravation is known as ‘sannipāta’. Fever, loss of appetite, and pain are attributable to the aggravation of pitta, kapha, and vāta respectively.


[42]Santānaka is the name of one of the 5 heavenly creepers. These soft creepers regard even a wild fire as soothing in comparison to the assault of the Asuras (JR). The footnote in the Kāvyamālā edition quotes the following verse from Mentha’s Hayagrīvavadha (quoted in turn in Sāhityadarpaṇa) for comparison – ‘spṛṣṭāstā nandane śacyā keśasambhogalālitāḥ | sāvajñaṃ pārijātasya mañjaryo yasya sainikaiḥ ||’ (‘The Asura’s soldiers touched with disrespect the floral clusters of the heavenly Pārijāta tree, which Shaci, Indra’s wife, used to honour by wearing on her tresses’)
[43]The elephants (Airāvata, etc.) of the various directions are described as bearing the earth’s burden. Since they are stripped off their position and put to work in the courtyards of the Asuras, they bend their heads in shame and not because of carrying the load of the earth. The footnote in the Kāvyamālā edition quotes the following hemistich from Magha’s Śiśupālavadha (1.57) for comparison - hṛte'pi bhāre mahatastrapābharāduvāha duḥkhena bhṛśānataṃ śiraḥ | (The rest of this verse is as follows: paretabharturmahiṣo:'munā dhanurvidhātum-utkhātaviṣāṇamaṇḍalaḥ). In this verse, Yama’s buffalo is described as bending its head low in shame though the burden of its bent horns has been removed by Ravana who has uprooted them to fashion his bow.
[44]A well-developed metaphor in which Brahma, anger, heart of the Ganas, and calm countenance stand for play director, actor, stage, and curtain respectively. Anger exhibits a rich repertoire of gestures, thus lending propriety to its comparison with an actor. 


#========
Canto18


1. Having imbibed the wine, namely, the news of the Daityas’ advent, with the goblet of their ears, Shiva’s attendants, their eyes and cheeks reddening, words faltering, and eyebrows frowning and fluttering, exhibited varied mannerisms.[1]
2. Their lower foreheads rendered hideous by the twirling of eyebrows and the spinning of eyeballs, they patted their sturdy shoulders with the palm of their hands, pulverizing the golden finger rings and releasing a cloud of dust that caused (their) bulging eyes to shut.[2] 
3. With the minute powder scattering from the edges of their numerous ornaments, which they broke in a fit of anger, the Pramatha warriors seemed to keep ready beforehand a cloud of dust for making the wives of the unruly Danavas shed copious tears (of widowhood, in the future).[3] 
4. Through the thick showers of dust raining down from the dazzling sapphires of the fancy necklace, which he squeezed hard in his palm, a certain attendant displayed (or so it seemed) a mass of powdery soot dripping from the lamp of fiery anger burning within his heart.[4]
5. Reddened by the intense heat, produced when rubbed together violently, and emitting a smoky trail, the palms of another Pramatha seemed to betray the path taken by the fire of his prowess to escape out (of his body).[5]
6. Thus did one warrior shatter a large ruby crest jewel by pounding it heavily with the fist that his angry-red countenance did not stand out prominently in the midst of the raining ruby dust.[6]
7. Another Pramatha, his broad forehead marked with deep, menacing frowns, spoke something very harsh. How could a great warrior like him, sullied by sudden anger, utter words that are soft/purged of anger? [7]
8. Its old wounds gaping widely in the frenzy of the moment, the body of a certain warrior seemed to sport a row of latticed windows for the indwelling Lady Courage to watch the marvellous and mystical dance of his Brows.[8]
9. By way of his large, gaping old wounds, filled with profuse sweat that poured out in the unrelenting anger, yet another warrior seemed to keep ready many a row of wells, overflowing with bravery’s liquid essence, so he could supress the burning heat of the enemy’s prowess.[9]
10. How very strange! The eyes of a certain Pramatha chief, which were characterized by the tremulousness/feebleness of pupils/stars, had befriended the beauty of lotuses in bloom, and were sporting a red glow, landed on a grand display of sharp swords/attained glory in nocturnal darkness.[10] 
11. Casting a careless momentary glance on his sword, another warrior seemed to scatter a heap of vermilion dust on it with the reddening glow of his eye corner to announce the forthcoming festival of war .[11] 
12. Their eyes flushed red in the desire to burn down every unruly foe, it seemed as if all the Pramathas had turned fire-eyed by the powers of Shiva, enemy of Death.[12]
13. Letting his bright red gaze float around for a long time, a certain warrior streaked the directions with a mosaic of cloudless lightning bolts to herald, as it were, the misfortune of his enemies.[13] 
14. As another Pramatha shook his head in intense anger, it appeared as if he had fitted his moon-like face with cymbal plates, masquerading as the swinging, gem-studded circular earrings adorning it, in anticipation of the dance of his enemy’s headless trunks.[14]
15. By hitting the floor with the face of his palm and creating a freshly gaping hole to emerge therein, yet another deeply outraged warrior instantly inaugurated, as it were, a yawning opening for his enemies, who were standing at the very pinnacle of pride, to tumble down.[15]
16. Desirous, as it were, of churning an ocular fire to quickly burn down the enemies, another Pramatha, attendant of the Three-eyed Lord, rubbed his lotus-hand hard against his broad forehead.[16] 
17. Listening to the consensus reached by the enemies after considering various options, a certain Pramatha scaled the peak of fresh, irresistible rage, wherefore, trepidation gained a strong foothold on his lips, unable to find any room in his heart that was pervaded by confidence.[17]
18. The quivering sprout-like lower lip of a third warrior, whose frightening frowns  resembled columns of smoke, appeared like the spark of anger’s fire, shaken up by the windy gale of hurried breathing.[18]
19. Continuously raining down plentiful droplets of sweat and tinged tawny by the lightning bolts, namely, the corners of his bloodshot eyes, another warrior readily grasped a celestial bow to make the wild, headless torsos (of the enemies), standing for peacocks, dance.[19]
20. Disguised as hundreds and hundreds of young bees flying up from the chaplet that swung to and fro when he shook his head in anger, it appeared as if a certain warrior’s eyebrows, spread like a creeper across the surface of his forehead and watered with perspiration, had put forth a fresh bounty of fruits.[20]
21. Through the pieces of a ruby-studded finger ring that broke when he rubbed his palms against each other, one angry Pramatha seemed to rain down the sparks in the midst of the blazing fire that was his fully grown jealous wrath.[21] 
22. At first, the cheeks of a certain warrior turned red like evening, then his frowning eyebrows emitted dense darkness, and finally, his boisterous laughter bloomed afresh like moonlight, which caused the lotus-faces of the enemies to wither away.[22]
23. Shiva’s attendants beheld the fresh beads of perspiration, sprouting on the chest of a certain warrior in a state of heightened agitation, as if they were the pearls fallen off his necklace, which broke all of a sudden when Lady Anger entered his heart in haste.[23]
24. Covered in wildly bristling, needle-like hair, every limb of a Pramatha hero seemed all prepared to emit out a pile of the enemy’s broken sword blades, which had got entrenched into it during several battles in the past.[24]
25. A slender sword trembled in the lotus-hand of a warrior and a creeper-like eyebrow trembled on his broad forehead. The third in this series - the equally dark and crooked mind of the enemies - started trembling too. 
26. A certain hero’s shaking sword, which was gripped by him in/with the angry desire to take part in the battle and whose dazzlingly dense glow resembled a frown, turned red in wrath, or so it seemed, because of the spreading radiance of the rubies set in his armlet.[25] 
27. All set to injure the enemies in battle, one Pramatha kept spinning a discus with his lotus-hand; a discus that became a whirlpool in the ocean of his unmatched valour, his arm standing for its lofty wave.[26] 
28. Another warrior seemed to freely furnish the blade of his sword with crimson lotuses, springing afresh in the stream of its shimmering edge, by quickly casting his unrestrained, angry red glances (on it).[27] 
29. Thus did an enraged Pramatha slam his fist against the ground with great force that even Maiden Earth’s heart broke asunder in fear, or so it seemed, by way of the gaping hole that was newly formed.
30. Another Pramatha’s dark red face, suffused on one side with swathes of lustre streaming forth from his (dark) sword, seemed to conjure up an untimely (solar) eclipse that signalled the enemy’s utter ruin.[28]
31. When a warrior tore his play-lotus apart in the belief that it was the abode of the enemy’s Fortune Goddess, it appeared to let out a wail through the hum of the bees swarming agitatedly within.
32. Enraged by the news of his enemies, a certain Pramatha, who possessed the strength of a lion in his long-drawn fights with elephants, seemed to release all the water that was imbibed by him from the shimmering edges of the enemy’s swords in several foregone battles by disguising it as an outpour of sweat.[29]  
33. After uprooting the lotus abodes of his enemy’s Lady Fortune, yet another soldier scattered their plentiful pollen by disguising it as the golden dust rained down by a row of pulverized finger rings.[30] 
34. Dripping with a steady flow of sweat, a certain Pramatha’s body wriggled in repetitive wrath, embraced tightly, as it were, by Lady Courage due to his relentless desire for savouring the mood of the upcoming battle.[31]
35. Yet another Pramatha’s face seemed to engage in the sport of simultaneously smearing Maiden Anger with a mixture of musk, camphor, and saffron through its dark, animated frowns, bright boisterous laughter, and the spreading glow of flushed redness respectively.
36. His mouth agape in careless yawns, one warrior stretched his arms afar, as if, with Bhairava’s training, he had started to devour his enemies greedily by grabbing them from each and every direction.[32]   
37. Dotted with so many open sores that were formed when the old, deep-rooted wounds gave way, the body of another warrior looked like a fancy cage for the female swan of heroic fame, whose perching rod was his long and sturdy arm.[33]
38. All set to violently shatter the temples of rutting scent elephants in the enemy’s army, the (lion-like) anger over their faces raised its tail up, or so it seemed, through the scary, creeper-like eyebrows that darted threateningly over their foreheads.[34]
39. The faces of the Ganas seemed to worship anger’s presiding deity with sweat drops masquerading as the ritual offering of (rice) grains, the crooked lines of an upward frown resembling the billowing trails of incense smoke, and the red flushes of anger standing for blood sacrifices.[35]
40. As anger’s ocean, enriched by streams of sweat, was stirred up in that assembly of the moon-crested Lord, the red glow of angry cheeks appeared like the its coral reef and the boisterous laughter, its foamy surf.[36]
41. Thus did their faces glow red in the scorching heat of their uncontained wrath that the crescent Moon on Shiva’s crest seemed to betray an untimely association with twilight because of the (red) rays radiating from them.
42. The newly intensified spirit of the Pramatha folks, who continuously exuded enormous courage and exhibited extraordinary enthusiasm, made their newfound association with anger all the more evident. This is, however, surprising because the unmatched majesty of their lake (or the lake they stood for), which was a perineal source of profound comfort to swans and caused excitement among herons, served no purpose to cranes.[37] 
43. Though Pushpadanta, a sincere devotee of the Lord, gritted the tips of his  teeth against each other savagely to express his intense anger, their strong edges remained unbroken, making it appear like he was adamantine-toothed.[38] 
44. Though his body was mere bones, Bhringiriti appeared stout because of the massive bloating caused by a cloak of bristling hair, filled on the inside with copious sweat pouring out continuously in a fit of anger.[39] 
45. The elephant-faced Ganesha produced a drizzle with his trunk even without playing in water by sending a wild shower of sweat drops in all the directions after sucking them away from his forehead.
46. Though the vermilion powder over Ganesha’s broad temples was washed away by the streaming sweat, its purpose was quickly served by the redness resulting from a fresh bout of anger.
47. Letting out a rough sigh, resembling a thunderstorm, from his mouth, the fire-born Skanda rained down drops of sweat in inflamed anger and made his peacock mount dance.[40]
48. Sporting a row of angry red faces; streaking the directions with the smoky trail of his long, upraised frowns; and burning secretly within, the fire-born Skanda  attained a state that matched with the nature of his source.[41] 
49. The brave elephant of the best kind/Virabhadra was tightly bound to a huge pillar/clutching a terrible sword and (yet) enjoyed freedom. Pacing about in agitation and eager to play the sport of butting against the enemy’s sloping chest, he caused much surprise.[42]
50. Beside himself with intoxicating pride, Tandu repeatedly struck the ground hard with the palm of his hand as if he were keeping time by clapping to the esoteric dance of his Eyebrows.[43]
51. The dance of Nandi’s brows manifested effortlessly and automatically due to his repeated practice of  stopping (with lifted eyebrows) the gods and the lords of the directions rushing in, one after another, through a corridor of doors.
52. His eyes afloat in anger’s overflowing stream, Nandi did not strain his palm even though he kept striking the floor repeatedly with it, thanks to the constant practice he had in the skilful beating of drums.[44]
53. A certain Pramatha’s face, ready to dive/readily diving into the water, namely, the shimmering edge of the enemy’s sharp/frigid sword, suffered many a contortion, accompanied by harsh/rough speech, and exhibited heavy breathing/an aggravation of the wind humour at the very outset.[45] 
54. The enraged heroes rendered streams of sweat running down their foreheads thickly mossy with their sharp frowns; streams, whose sandy beds were formed by the powdered dust of the ruby ornaments getting shattered in a fit of anger.[46]
55. In this way, as very many proud Pramatha folks got angry, their arms drenched in copious streams of sweat, foreheads transformed into dance stages for the ghastly eyebrows, and broad cheeks overlain with a red flush that resembled a mail curtain, the earth itself seemed to collapse under the constant weight of their pounding fists and stamping heels. 
56. Their bodies continually dripping with sweat as if they were wearing a tight armour presided over by Varuna, the lord of waters, for the forthcoming battle, they vigorously shook their hands, which seemed to wield fire-missiles by dint of their dense red glow that resulted from striking against the floor repeatedly.[47] 
57. The intense anger of the Pramatha chieftains caused much pain even to their own limbs: their palms collided against each other; teeth bit the lower lip hard; and foot ached by thumping on the ground. How then could it not hurt the enemy’s armies, which were akin to dainty women? 
58. They seemed to emit from their mouths the blazing fire of the enemy’s prowess, which they had gulped down on each and every battleground in the past, by disguising it as their flaming, boisterous laughter. And the patron goddesses of courage, who were keen to locate the Asuras in the night-like darkness of war, seemed to be carrying lamps, masquerading as their (i.e., the Pramatha folk’s) angry red eyes. 
59. Terrifying to look at because of their trembling faces, whose sprightly eyebrows appeared like evil comets dancing wildly; causing repeated earthquakes with the violent stamping of their heels; and invoking the apocalypse, as it were, with their angry red eyes that resembled a row of eclipsed suns, they seemed to proclaim the enemy’s universal doom.[48]
60. And so, as the Pramathas expressed intense, insufferable wrath with their hands, whose clanking armlets rendered their foreheads noisy, even their garments seemed to threaten (the enemies) by angrily waggling their index fingers disguised as the hemmed borders that fluttered in a strong gust of wind.[49]
61. His glorious ablution conducted with streams of sweat pouring down incessantly, Anger was thus crowned emperor of the royal realm constituted by the faces of the Lord’s attendants, whereafter, redness, like a doorkeeper, brandished their long eyebrow, standing for a cane, and expelled the bright Glow of serenity far away from the precincts of their broad cheeks.[50]
________________
[1]The verse’s idea is based on the similarity between the physical effects of anger and drunkenness (JR).
[2]An alternate reading suggested by JR takes ‘pṛthu’ as an independent word qualifying ‘rajaḥ’. In that case, ‘cloud of dust’ must be changed to ‘thick cloud of dust’ and ‘bulging’ must be dropped. The correctness of the word ‘akṣibhruva’ is established through the rule ‘acaturavicaturasucatura----akṣibhruva---’ (JR).
[3]‘Beforehand’ = ‘even before the battle began’ 
[4]Soot, like powdered sapphire, is blackish in colour. 
[5]Redness, heat, and smoke characterize the path of fire (JR).
[6]The angry red face went unnoticed amidst the raining red dust of rubies. 
[7]The word ‘aparuṣam’ is used in the dual senses of ‘soft’ (a+paruṣam) and ‘purged of anger’ (apa+ruṣam).
[8]Queens watch dance performances from latticed windows (JR). Mankha describes gaping wounds also in 18.9, 18.37, and 22.12
[9]Heat is overcome by pouring water. 
[10]An apparent contradiction based on pun. Whatever is characterized by feebleness of stars, friendship with lotuses, and redness cannot attain glory in nocturnal darkness (that is characterized by the opposite, namely, brightness of stars, enmity towards lotuses, and blackness). ‘Niśātamasiḍambaram’ can be split in 2 ways: ‘niśātamasi+ḍambaram’ (‘in the nocturnal darkness + glory’)  and ‘niśātam+asiḍambaram’ (‘sharp + display of swords’). 
[11]Vermilion dust is scattered during festive occasions (JR). 
[12]The word ‘antakaripu’ (‘enemy of Death’), used for Shiva, is significant. It is with his fire-bearing eye that Shiva burnt down Yama, the god of death (JR). The poet, by imagining the Pramathas as having become fire-eyed like Shiva, seems to suggest that they too can have the power to defy death.
[13]Lightning bolts, unaccompanied by clouds, are an ominous sign. JR gives an alternative reading that takes ‘paṭu’ as a separate word – an adverb, meaning ‘cleverly’, which qualifies the verb ‘nināya’ (In that case, the translation would necessitate removing ‘bright’ and adding ‘cleverly’ before ‘streaked’)
[14]The description of headless trunks dancing on battlegrounds is commonplace in Sanskrit poetry. The earrings resemble cymbals both by their (round) appearance and (sound-producing/swinging) action (JR). ‘Ninartiṣati’ is a desiderative verb that is used here to denote future (i.e., in the sense of ‘nartiṣyti’).
[15]One who reaches a pinnacle must end up falling – ‘patanāntaḥ samucchraya bhavanti’ (JR).  Mankha frequently describes slamming of the fist against the ground as a reaction of anger (see 18.19, 29, 50, 52, 55, 56; and 20.8)
[16]The word ‘attendant of the Three-eyed Lord’ (‘trinayanānucara’) carries poetic propriety (JR).
[17]His lips trembled in anger, not his heart in fear (JR). 
[18]Quivering lower lip, frown, and hurried breathing accompany anger. 
[19]The verse compares the Pramatha to a cloud without literally saying so. The celestial bow is the rainbow. 
[20]Here the bees are likened to the fruits put forth by the creeper in the form of the eyebrow (JR). 
[21]The scattering pieces of ruby appear like the sparks of the fire that is his anger (JR)
[22]A temporal sequence is described here – of evening, followed by darkness, then moonlight, and finally, the withering away of lotuses. 
[23]JR provides an alternate reading for ‘hārasūtrān’ as ‘‘hārasūtān’ (‘produced by the necklace that broke off’).
[24]The Pramatha described here had imbibed pieces of swords while fighting in bygone battles; the hairs standing on end are those very pieces being emitted out at present (JR).
[25]The sword is itself described as overcome with anger. ‘Lauhitaka’ is ruby.
[26]The use of the genitive case ‘ripūṇām’ with ‘niprahantum’ is according to the rule ‘jāsi-niprahaṇa-nāṭa-krātha-piṣāṃ himsāyāṃ’
[27]The angry red glances are compared to crimson lotuses (JR) 
[28]Untimely = at daybreak (JR). An untimely eclipse forebodes misfortune.
[29]Idea similar to verse 24 above. While verse 24 talks about pieces of swords, this verse talks about the water-like shimmering edge of the swords. A similar idea is repeated once again in 18.58
[30]The golden dust is likened to the pollen of lotuses (JR). JR renders ‘ūrmikā’ (‘finger ring) with ‘vālikā’
[31]One sweats and trembles in ecstasy when embraced by a maiden (JR).
[32]Bhairava, also known as Mahākāla, is a fierce form of Shiva. 
[33]The open sores are similar to the gaps in the cage, that is the Pramatha’s body. Fame is white in colour according to the Sanskrit poetic convention (‘yaśaḥśauklyam’, Kāvyamīmāṃsā, chapter 15); the comparison of fame (‘kīrti’, in the feminine gender) with a female swan is therefore appropriate.
[34]The anger of the Pramathas is compared to a lion without stating so literally. ‘Udapucchayata’ is derived from ‘utpucchay’ – ‘to raise the tail’
[35]Arghakaṇa = rice grains offered in worship? 
[36]The ocean is stirred up by the moon, which, in this case, is the moon adorning Shiva’s crest. It is fed by streams, possesses coral reefs, and is filled with foam.
[37]A verse in which apparent contradiction is effected through pun, particularly the type that requires breaking the same words in two different ways to get two different meanings. Such a pun is called ‘Sabhaṅgaśleṣa’. The verse paints two pictures, one that is contextual (i.e., about the angry behaviour of the Pramathas) and the other that is non-contextual (about a lake). It is the non-contextual meaning that presents a contradiction – the lake gives shelter to swans and herons, but is of no use to cranes. This is odd since there is no specific reason why a lake should not be useful to cranes. The contradiction in the non-contextual meaning can be resolved by taking recourse to the contextual meaning, which is consistent throughout. The following are the two ways in which some words/parts of words in the verse must be read (The first way of breaking pertains to the contextual, and the second, to the non-contextual, meaning): sasphāra+sāra+sahita/sasphāra+sārasa+hita; adhikaṃ kamapi/adhikaṅkam+api; sa raso/saraso; nava+kopa+yogam/na vaka+upayogam. In thus understanding the words, I have deviated from JR in two places. For the non-contextual meaning, JR reads ‘adhikaṃ’ as ‘in water’ (i.e., adhi+kaṃ, where ‘kaṃ’ stands for ‘water’). I, however, read ‘adhikaṃ’ along with the ‘kaṃ’ (of ‘kamapi’) that follows as ‘adhikaṅkam’ (‘among herons’). This seems to be a better way of understanding the pun here, given the first and last lines of the verse also allude to birds, namely, sārasa (swan) and vaka (heron).  Likewise, JP takes one of the meanings of ‘sarasaḥ’ as ‘spirited’, which qualifies ‘abhinavaprakarṣaḥ’. I understand ‘sarasaḥ’ as two different words ‘sa’ (‘that’) and rasaḥ (‘spirit’). In this case, it is ‘abhinavaprakarṣaḥ’ (‘newly intensified’/ ‘possessing fresh intensity’) that qualifies ‘rasa’.   
[38]Pushpadanta is an attendant of Shiva to whom the devotional hymn ‘Śivamahimnaḥ Stotra’ is ascribed. He also played an important role in bringing to earth the collection of stories called ‘Bṛhatkathā’ that was narrated by Shiva to Parvati.
[39]Inside=the intervening spaces between bones (JR). Bhṛṅgiriṭi is another attendant of Shiva, who is often portrayed as bony and emaciated. A funny verse (‘devī putramasūta - - - sthūlāsthijanmā ravaḥ’), quoted in works such as Kāvyamīmāṃsā (chapter 5) and Sarasvatīkaṇṭhābharaṇa (chapter 4), describes the noise of bones breaking into pieces when Bhṛṅgiriṭi and Cāmuṇḍā, two emaciated attendants of Shiva, hug each other in joy to celebrate the birth of a baby boy to their master
[40]Skanda is compared to a cloud here without, however, making the comparison obvious and literal. Clouds are accompanied by thunderstorms, pour down rain, and make peacocks dance.  
[41]‘Source’ here refers to ‘fire’. One of the names of Skanda is ‘Agnibhūḥ’, i.e., ‘Fire-born’.  
[42]An apparent contradiction based on pun; whoever is bound cannot enjoy freedom. Bhadra is a superior class of elephants. Its features are as follows: ‘pratimāneṣu vipulaścārupṛṣṭhāyatānanaḥ | mukhe surabhiniḥśvāsastāmrajihvauṣṭhatālukaḥ || tathāsya tulyasaṃsthānau dantau śubhrau viśeṣataḥ | madhupiṅgalanetraśca mahākāyo mahābalaḥ || purastāducchritaścāpi paścādavanato'pi yaḥ | dhanurvinatavaṃśaśca samapādatalaḥ śubhaḥ || viṃśatyā ca nakhairyukto yo’'ṣṭādaśabhireva vā | vidyuddavāgnisiṃhebhyo na bibhetyaṅkuśādapi ||anvarthavedī śūraśca kṣamāvānna ca karkaśaḥ | kalyāṇamedhāstejasvī sa bhadraḥ parikīrtitaḥ ||’ (‘The Bhadra’s trunk, in between its tusks, is massive; its back is handsome, face broad; breath fragrant, and tongue, lips, and palate coppery red; its tusks are identical in shape and size and particularly pure white; its eyes are tawny like honey; it is huge in size and very strong; its backbone is bent like a bow and feet equal; it is auspicious; it has 20 or 18 toe nails; it does not fear lightning, forest fire, lion, or even the mahout’s goad; it understands commands perfectly, is brave, forbearing, calm, intelligent, and dignified’, Śārṅgadharapaddhati, 78.18-22). Virabhadra, yet another attendant of Shiva, was born from the latter’s anger after Sati, Shiva’s previous wife, immolated herself at the conducted by Daksha, her father, who insulted her and her husband (tatastatkrodhajādvahnerāvirāsīnmahādyutiḥ | - - - mama sarvagaṇeṣviha | vīrabhadrākhyayā hi tvaṃ prathitiṃ paramāṃ vraja || (Skanda Purāṇa, Kāśīkhaṇḍa, 89.19-30)
[43]Tandu, from whose name comes the word ‘tāṇḍava’, standing for a robust style of dancing, is regarded as a teacher of dance and dramaturgy.
[44]It is Nandi who beats the drum when Shiva dances (cf. ‘sānandaṃ nandihastāhatamuraja --- cītkāravatyaḥ’, Mālatīmādhava, 1.1)
[45]The effects of anger are likened to those caused by plunging into cold water. The word ‘śaitya’ must be understood as ‘śitasya bhāvaḥ’ (‘sharpness’) and ‘śītasya bhāvaḥ’ (‘frigidity’) in the contexts of anger and plunging into water respectively (JR).  
[46]Eyebrows, like moss, are dark in colour. 
[47]Like Shiva, the Pramathas too wielded (or so it seemed) fiery missiles; they also appeared to be wearing watery armours for protection from fire.
[48]The simultaneous occurrence of comets, earthquakes, and multiple solar eclipses portends evil. 
[49]One threatens others by pointing one’s index finger at them and shaking it up and down. 
[50]In this detailed metaphor, anger, face, sweat, redness, eyebrow, serenity, and cheeks stand respectively for a newly crowned emperor, his kingdom, ritual water for the emperor’s coronation, emperor’s doorkeeper, cane wielded by the doorkeeper, emperor’s adversary, and the kingdom’s borders. 


#========
Canto19


1. And so, the Pramathas, who were keen to draw out the fortune of the enemies from their coffers, rotated their curved, creeper-like eyebrows standing for keys.[1] 
2. With a shower of gold dust raised by their pulverized ornaments, they (seemingly) scattered perfumed powder to welcome Goddess Victory in advance.
3. As they thumped their hands in violent anger, even the walls in Shiva’s assembly hall shook, in fear, as it were.
4. As they marched against the enemy, the fire blazing on Shiva’s forehead, akin to a pedestal, conducted their lamp-waving ritual.[2] 
5. Exhibiting the dance of eyebrows and causing bite marks on lips, Angry Conduct became their sole beloved.[3] 
6. Presently, the glow of their reddening eyes transformed into an untimely twilight that heralded the enemy’s annihilation.
7. Flushed red in anger, the attendants of Shiva - Parashurama’s master –seemed to have taken a bath in the pool of their enemy’s blood.[4]
8. They gifted, as it were, coats of cosmetic powder, washed away by sweat, to Anger for having aroused the spirit of war in them.[5]
9. Thereafter, Shiva, a pillar of courage, waved his right hand and suppressed the angry uproar of the Pramathas.
10.  Dousing the fire of their anger completely, or so it seemed, with the bright rays radiating from his teeth like the numerous streams of the river on his crest;
11.  and blessing them with a share of energy by casting on them his eyes, within which the triad of luminaries dance;[6]  
12.  he uttered the following words boldly; words that were made vivid by a voice that echoed the roar of thunderclouds.[7] 
13.  “Wherefore this fresh entry of miseries into your hearts, revealed by your unexpectedly pale faces?[8]
14.  May your mind, thriving in sorrow/summer and suffering terrible heat/discomfort, gain continuous repose in the shade of sword blades standing for creepers.[9]
15.  How can this calamity, no more than a speck of dust, continue to exist there, where (even) the water droplets scattered by Brahma with the tips of the sacred Kusha grass are effective?[10]
16.  Why does Indra’s mighty arm, which inflicted pain on Vrtra by (merely) brandishing a mass of foam, not cause misery to the enemy?[11]
17.  How, moreover, does Hari’s bow endure the elegant dance of the creeper-like eyebrows of the enemy’s fawn-eyed wives? Or his (dark) sword, the kohl that lines their eyes?[12]
18.  How do the winds/gods not cause the creeper-like bodies of the enemy’s wives to tremble after making their flowery smiles wither away?
19.  Why doesn’t Fire turn the cheeks of the enemy’s pretty-browed women ashen white by producing boundless heat/suffering in their bodies?[13] 
20.  Let the Saman hymn in the mouths of Brahma, the flow of ichor in the temples of celestial elephants, and Yama’s rod strengthen uncertainty in the hearts of our opponents.[14] 
21.  May these (twelve) blazing Suns, their bodies covered in iron armours that resemble (dark) unseasonal clouds, rise together to forebode the enemy’s doomsday.[15]
22.  Over here is Varuna. Who can withstand him? Even the sun – a rich receptacle of radiant rays – is deprived of brilliance merely by facing the direction (i.e., the West) he presides over.[16] 
23.  He makes headless trunks dance vehemently/stirs up receptacles of water. Deep lakes litter his path. And Lady Courage, who loves Kubera more than anyone else, joins him (i.e., Varuna) like a small stream.[17]
24.  It does not behove you to entertain a defeatist attitude in your hearts at present. Enough of grieving about what has already happened. Extermination of the enemies is what you must strive for.
25.  and 26. Dear gods! Even though many a demon – fatigued by roaming around in the battlefield – has previously enjoyed a long, wakeless sleep in the shade of your slender, creeper-like swords, let a portion of my lustre still augment the blazing fire of your arms to burn down the enemies.”[18]
27.  Thus sated by Ugra’s fiery effulgence (in the form of speech), which was worthy of grasp with the ears, the nectar-sipping celestials spoke to the Blessed One once again.[19]
28.  “O Master! We indeed radiate a powerful energy - the payment we receive for rendering service unto you. But that energy has been obstructed by the broad chests, that resemble gateways, of the Pura demons/cities.[20] 
29.  Ishana! We cannot withstand your boundless brilliance even as we prepare to receive it. For, by merely moving one corner of your eye, you reduced to ashes Death and Desire.[21] 
30.  Lord of exalted exploits! It behoves you therefore to destroy the demonic cities singlehandedly. Never can a lamp hope to expel the darkness that envelops the heaven and the earth.[22]
31.  Offer their lives as oblation in the flaming fire of your dazzling weapon so every direction can obtain its share of their ashes/prosperity once more.[23]
32.  Unborn One! Shorn of our splendour by your impenetrable glory, we are akin to lamps in the presence of the sun’s bright rays.[24] 
33.  Bharga! It befits you to put your blessed effort in the act that shall see Vishnu himself transform into your arrow/supplicant.
34.  Sharva! Making the sun and moon its wheels/assuming a fruitful appearance/assuming the form of the sun and the moon, the entire earth shall attain eminent chariothood/a lofty position in this exploit of yours.[25] 
35.  Primordial Being! Brahma, who presides over the material attribute that comes after sattva (i.e., rajas)/is spirited by nature, shall become your charioteer when you will be stirred up to burn down the Cities.[26] 
36.  Hara! Whose speech does not falter/where does a mountainous bow not spring up newly into existence when you set out to exterminate your foes?[27]
37.  Triple-eyed One! Drawing close to your ear, the king of serpents shall become your illustrious asset/bowstring when you will be completely overwhelmed by a desire to burn down the enemies.[28] 
38.  And lastly, let our puny lustre render service to your glorious energy, which, having grown in intensity to exterminate the enemy, can scarcely  be tolerated by the three worlds”.
39.  Raising its cupped hands in salutation, the celestial horde thus spoke words that were characterized by oblique expression to the Lord who wears the infant moon on his crest.[29]  
40.  Thereafter, the Lord – destroyer of Kama – once again wove a garland of words that the gods placed upon their heads with joy. 
41.  “So be it. I have much enthusiasm for this enterprise, whose felicitous fruit consists in securing your welfare. 
42.  Dear gods! Arrange for a chariot that owes its glory to the charioteer/is a rich source of mercury, is furnished with axles and wheels/Vibhitaka trees, is endowed with horses capable of bearing burden/sustains the globe, and can bear my weight – a chariot that is similar therefore to Mt. Kailasa.[30]
43.  Let the stream of my heroism readily receive the gift of a chariot/flow forth and erase from the foreheads of the enemies the black soot, namely, their agitated frowns”.
44.  The gods were so delighted with these words of Shiva, which followed one another in an uninterrupted sequence like wave after wave, that they felt the enemy had already been defeated by their prowess. 
45. Having thus sipped this nectar streaming forth from the ocean, namely, Shiva, with their attentive ears standing for cupped hands, the foremost of gods, now confident, considered the office of immortals secure once more.
46.  On listening to the reassuring words of Shiva, the gods were overjoyed, their faces acquiring a fresh and long-lasting glow as if by shedding off sorrow’s slough.[31] 
47.  At that moment, the Crystalline Mountain, its deep interiors echoing the shouts of the excitedly jubilant heavenly beings, played the part of an auspicious conch as Shiva set out with an army to besiege the enemies.[32]
48.  Meanwhile, in the worlds inhabited by the Tripura Asuras, there occurred events that were ridden with a series of evil omens and blatantly betrayed the doom that was about to occur in the near future from a host of calamities.
49.  Shaking excessively due, as if, to her association with the Serpent Lord, who trembled in the fear of being stretched tight by Shiva when he would  become the latter’s bowstring very soon, the earth suffered excruciating exhaustion from being tossed up and down the sloping temples of the elephants guarding the directions.[33]
50.  Due to an overhanging headless trunk that was dancing wildly like Rahu’s detached torso, the sun’s orb seemed to sport a deep, gaping hole in its centre so it could play the role of Shiva’s chariot wheel in the near future.[34]
51.  Drops of blood raining down continuously from apocalyptic clouds stuck to the limbs of the Asura damsels. It seemed as if a thick paste of saffron was giving the soon-to-be widows a hug before bidding them goodbye at the end of a long-drawn friendship.[35]
52.  Resembling tails wagged by a herd of Yama’s excited buffalo mounts and putting on the appearance of waves rising in the vast blue ocean of the sky,  ominous comets, which instilled fear in the hearts of people, were a caricature of the tresses, dishevelled in sudden fear, of the Direction Maidens.[36]  
53.  Concealing the interspace between heaven and earth with its flooding lustre, a certain fire, which was scary due to the lurid lightning bolts accompanying it, spread across the directions. I suppose it set the stage for the abiding fire of Shiva’s arrow to show up soon and annihilate the arrogant adversaries.
54.  On the eve of the calamitous destruction to be wrought by the unruly fire, that shall blaze forth at the tip of Shiva’s arrow like an infinity of Aurva’s submarine infernos, the ocean, its row of waves rising high like goosebumps, appeared agitated and restless even in the daytime.[37] 
55.  Time and again, stars rained down on the earth like teardrops shed by Lady Heaven in the anxious anticipation, or so it seemed, of the discharge of Shiva’s arrow and the sky’s concealment by it. On the emerald pavements in the Asuras’ courtyards that were shaken by the earth’s tremors, such stars gave the appearance of water droplets rolling over the surface of lotus leaves.[38]
56.  In the case of an evil omen, standing for a wicked elephant on the loose, the fiery glow of the blazing directions became the vermilion powder adorning its lofty temples; an abrupt shower of stars, a spray of water droplets expelled by its trunk; and the weird comets in the sky, its ornamental flag posts.[39] 
57.  Resembling a puff of smoke spewed out by Shiva’s fire-laden arrow in advance, a certain full-grown cloud flooded the earth with bloody showers that were briefly camouflaged by the dreaded dance of the dazzling red light emitted by a circle of lightning streaks.[40] 
58.  No sooner did a cloud engulf the earth in its bloody downpour, which appeared like a stream of red lac dripping continuously from the feet of Death as he danced in joy, than the eyes of the terrified Asura women too rained blood, as it were, through their tears that were reddened by the spreading glow of their tawny eye corners.[41]
59.  The strange winds of destruction seemed to rain down an endless pile of embers over the skin; the sky, its horizon in flames, scorched the eyes severely; the putrid smell of pouring blood repelled the noses of the Asura womenfolk, and the sudden, hideous howls of jackals repeatedly rent the ears even at daytime.[42]
60.  That very simultaneous blooming of flowers particular to different times, which used to occur in the past from the coming together of the six seasons for rendering service in the Asura realm, took place in the present time from the untimely flowering of ominous trees.[43]
61.  But the eyes of the Asura women experienced no sudden thrill at the sight of the untimely flowers, whose multi-coloured petals were hidden from view by drops of blood that kept raining down and falling on them nonstop.
62.  Striving hard to surpass Parasurama, or so it seemed, Diti’s sons plunged into puddles of blood,  fed by the bloody downpour, as they walked through the streets.[44] 
63.  One cloud, raining down dust from the sky above, seemed to spew the sand which it had imbibed along with the water of flooding rivers. By coming in contact with this dust, the elephants in the Asura army enjoyed a dust bath without ever wasting their energy uselessly in a water play  (preceding the dust bath).[45]
64.  Even in the midst of a great many ominous events, the dust shower came as a blessing to the Asura damsels since it blocked their vision so thoroughly they were spared the ever-renewing pain of anxiety that would otherwise arise whenever they saw the directions, which appeared very scary because of the horror unleashed by myriad evil omens. 
65.  Like some strange androgynous form of Shiva that befriended the left-sided limbs of males and appropriated the right-sided ones of females and flaunted many a spontaneous expression that was in keeping with the annihilation at hand, a certain anxious tremor spread across the Asura realms and caused extreme panic beyond words.[46] 
66.  In this manner, Evil Portents, manifesting exuberantly, started to overrun the demonic cities’ neighbourhood. They began by dispatching messengers, as it were, through a legion of large-scale calamities. Elsewhere, at that very moment, the Celestial Abode thoroughly enjoyed the lavish, lucky embraces of every Blessed Omen, each growing to its fruition.    
________________
[1]‘Arikoṣebhyaḥ’ is both ‘from the coffers of the enemies’ and ‘from the coffers in the form of the enemies’. One rotates the key to a coffer for opening it (JR).
[2]A case of suggested hyperbole (‘pratīyamāna utprekṣā’, JR): conducted their lamp-waving ritual = conducted, as it were, their lamp-waving ritual. The hyperbole is not made literal by using a word, such as ‘iva’ (‘as it were’).
[3]Angry conduct (‘krodhakriyā’) is likened to a beloved who makes bite marks on her lover’s lips (JR). People move eyebrows and bite their lips in anger. The poet attributes these actions to angry conduct itself by personifying it as a lady.
[4]The word ‘Bhārgavaguru’ (‘Parashurama’s master’) for Shiva is significant; Parashurama filled the five lakes at Samantapañcaka with the blood of his enemies, belonging to the Kṣatriya clan, whom he exterminated 21 times (‘trisaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivīṃ kṛtvā niḥkṣatriyāṃ prabhuḥ | samantapañcake pañca cakāra rudhiratrahradān ||’, Mahābhārata, 3.117.9)
[5]JR explains ‘pūrṇapātra’ as ‘ārātrika’. Pūrṇapātra is the gift, comprising of jewels, clothes, etc., which people grab with excitement during festive occasions (‘harṣādutsavakāle yadalaṅkārāṃśukādikam | ākṛṣya gṛhyate pūrṇapātraṃ pūrṇālakaṃ ca tat || quoted from jaṭādharakośa in Śabdakalpadruma)
[6]The three luminaries are sun, moon, and fire, all of which are characterized by energy
[7]Verses 10-12 form a Tilaka set. 
[8]‘Prāveśika’ is a technical term in Nāṭyaśāstra and refers to a song that is sung when an actor enters the stage. Here, the miseries stand for actors (JR), the heart for stage, and the paleness of the faces for the entry song.
[9] Śuci means ‘in sorrow’ and ‘summer’. In its meaning as ‘in sorrow’, it is an independent word whereas, it forms a compound with ‘rūḍha’ in its meaning as ‘summer’. JR gives an alternative interpretation of the verse in which the mind stands for a hero, the miseries for evil women, and the swords for noble-minded ladies.
[10]Dust is suppressed by spraying water. The purport of the verse is that a few drops of potent water scattered by Brahma with the tips of the sacred Kuśa grass suffice to destroy the Asuras. 
[11]This verse employs the sound-based trope ‘Yamaka’ in which the same set of syllables are repeated with a change in meaning. The string of syllables ‘ahitāpadam’ must be split as ‘ahi-tāpa-dam’ at the end of the verse’s second line and as ‘ahita-āpadam’ at the end of the fourth line. Indra killed the Asura Vrtra, also known as ‘Ahi’, by brandishing a mass of foam (‘apāṃ phenena pārvati | jaghāna samare vṛtraṃ’, Skanda Purāṇa, Avantī Khaṇḍa, 2.29)
[12]The verse is based on the similarity of Vishnu’s bow with the eyebrows of the Asura women and of his sword with the line of kohl adorning their eyes (JR). Since the graceful movements of the eyebrows and the beautification of eyes with kohl are related to a joyful married life, the suggestion is that Vishnu’s bow and sword, by killing the Asuras, are capable of rendering their wives widows.
[13]Fire turns things to ashes. 
[14]The verse alludes, by means of pun, to the four expedients (‘upāyas’) that are to be used against one’s enemy, including ‘sāma’ (pacification), ‘dāna’ (offering gifts), ‘bheda’ (causing discord), and ‘daṇḍa’ (punishment) (JR). Sāma, dāna, bheda, and daṇḍa also mean the hymns of the Sāma Veda, ichor, uncertainty, and rod respectively.
[15]The Sun god has 12 different forms, wherefore one of his names is ‘Dvādaśātmā’. A simultaneous rise of the 12 suns, accompanied by untimely clouds, heralds destruction. 
[16]The fact of the sun setting in the western direction is fancied by the poet as resulting due to the brilliance of Varuna, who presides over that direction (JR).
[17]The verse praises both Varuna and Kubera. ‘Puraḥ sarāgā dhanade’ (‘loving Kubera foremost’) can also be read as ‘puraḥsara+agādha+nade’ (‘accompanied by deep lakes that flow in front of him’). The lakes carry out the orders of Varuna, who is the lord of waters. They are therefore described as flowing in front of him (JR). 
[18]‘Long, wakeless sleep’ = ‘death’. The genitive case of the object ‘bhujoṣmaṇaḥ’ in the expression ‘bhujoṣmaṇaḥ upaskurutām’ is according to the rule ‘kṛñaḥ pratiyatne’; the addition of the prefix ‘s’ before the verb root ‘kṛ’ in ‘upaskurute’ is according to the rule ‘upātpratiyatna - - -’ (JR).
[19]There is an apparent contradiction in describing ‘tejas’ (‘fiery effulgence’) as causing ‘āpyāya’ (satiety, a feeling of satisfaction) and ‘śrutigrāhya’ (being worthy of grasp with the ears). Firstly, it is water that is described as ‘āpyāyana’, i.e., ‘causing āpyāya’ (‘kledanaṃ piṇḍanaṃ - - - āpyāyanondanaṃ | - - - ambhaso vṛttayastvimāḥ ||’, Bhāgavatapurāṇa, 3.26.43). Secondly, the quality of the fire element is colour, which is grasped with the eyes (‘uṣṇasparśavattejaḥ - - - indriyaṃ rūpagrāhakaṃ cakṣuḥ’, Tarkasaṅgraha).
[20]The huge gates of a city obstruct the entry of sunlight. The purport is that the gods are bereft of energy and not just short of it since verse 19.32 describes them as being ‘shorn of energy’ – ‘saṅgalanmahasaḥ’ (JR).
[21]If death and desire, personified as Yama and Kama, themselves couldn’t bear Shiva’s fiery energy, how could anyone else?
[22]An example of suggested simile that compares Shiva with the sun, since it is the sun that dispels the darkness enveloping the heaven and the earth (JR). 
[23]Bhūti = ashes, prosperity (JR); heti = flame, weapon. 
[24]An example of the poetic trope Yamaka in the first line of the verse, effected by the repetition of the syllables ‘te’ ‘ja’, and ‘sā’.
[25]The earth transforms into Shiva’s chariot, with the sun and the moon for its wheels, when he undertakes to kill the Tripuras. ‘Puṣpavantau’ stands for ‘the sun and the moon taken together’ (‘ekayoktyā puṣpavantau divākaraniśākarau’, quoted from Amarakośa by JR). The word ‘Aṅgīkṛtapuṣpavadākṛtiḥ’, qualifying the earth, may mean ‘one that has made the sun and the moon its limbs’ or ‘one that has assumed a fruitful appearance’. It may also mean ‘one that has assumed the form of the sun and the moon’. This third meaning, which has not been explained by JR, seems to go well with the pun in ‘uccai rathadaśām’, which itself can be understood in two ways – ‘uccaiḥ+rathadaśām’ (eminent chariothood’) and ‘uccaiḥ+atha, daśām’ (a lofty position). Since the sun and the moon occupy a lofty position in the sky, the  earth too will attain a lofty position if it assumes their form.
[26]Brahma transforms into Shiva’s charioteer during his current exploit. JR explains the pun in the second half of the verse also as follows: ‘(When you will be stirred up to burn down the Cities), a remarkably powerful plan will fall into place’.  
[27]The Mandara mountain becomes Shiva’s bow. ‘Cāpalatānavam’ can be read as ‘cāpa-latā, navam’ or ‘cāpala-tānavam’ (JR).
[28]Vasuki, the king of serpents, becomes Shiva’s bowstring. 
[29]The word ‘Bālendumakuṭa’ (‘Bearing the infant moon on the crest’), used for Shiva, is significant. Since the infant moon is curved (‘vakra’), the poet suggests that the Lord is a connoisseur of oblique speech (‘vakrokti’).    
[30]The compound ‘dhuryadhara’, in the case of the mountain, must be separated as ‘dhuryā dharā yasya’ - ‘capable of bearing the earth’ (JR).
[31]This is similar to a snake shedding off its slough (The word ‘harikañcukanyāyena’ with a query mark in the accompanying commentary published by Kāvyamālā could possibly be ‘ahikañcukanyāyena’)
[32]The resounding Silver Mountain is likened to a white conch being blown at the commencement of Shiva’s military march. ‘Abhiṣiṣeṇayiṣoḥ’ (‘senayā abhiyātumicchoḥ’, JR) is the genitive singular of ‘abhiṣiṣeṇayiṣuḥ’, a desiderative adjective derived from ‘abhiṣeṇay’ (‘to attack with an army’). 
[33]The calamity described here is earthquake. The Earth’s shaking is attributed to the shaking of the Serpent Lord, who carries her on his hoods; he, in turn, shakes in the fear of being stretched by Shiva when the latter will employ him as his bowstring. The verses that follow describe various other evil omens such as such as a headless trunk overhanging the sun, rain of blood, embers, stars, and dust, comets, fire, apocalyptic clouds, agitated ocean, howling jackals, and unseasonal bloom of flowers.
[34]A wheel has a hole in its centre (JR). ‘Kūbarī’ is chariot. 
[35]The widowed Asura women wouldn’t be able to decorate their bodies, including applying saffron paste.
[36]The comets appeared like the tails of Yama’s buffalo mounts, waves in the sky’s ocean, and the dishevelled tresses of Directions.  
[37]The ocean’s fear is that it will be dried up the fire of Shiva’s arrow. Aurva is the submarine fire. 
[38]The shaking emerald pavements are akin to tremulous lotus leaves and the stars falling on them, to water droplets.
[39]‘Kadalikā’ = flag post (JR)  
[40]The idea is that the bloody showers could not be made out separately from the dazzling (red) light of the lightning streaks (JR).
[41]The eye corners of the Asura women are tawny on account of crying (JR) 
[42]Though the poet leaves out the tongue while describing the effects of the calamities on the sense organs, one can surmise that it too was adversely affected by a scarcity of food (JR).
[43]The same untimely blooming of flowers, which, in the past, was due to the six seasons coming together for serving the Asuras served as an ominous sign at present (JR).
[44]Parashurama offered libations to his forefathers in the blood-filled Samantapañcaka lake (‘sa teṣu rudhirāmbhassu hradeṣu krodhamūrchitaḥ | pitṝn santarpayannāsa rudhireṇeti naḥ śrutam ||’, Mahābhārata, 1.2.5; also see footnote under 19.7 above) 
[45]Elephants enjoy a dust bath after playing in water. In this case, however, the elephants were able to enjoy one without uselessly wasting their energy in a waterplay preceding it. The purport is that there was such a heavy rain of dust, the elephants of the Asuras enjoyed a dust bath (JR).
[46]The Ardhanārīśvara (androgynous) form of Shiva takes possession of the male and the female halves on the right and left sides respectively. But the tremor of anxiety took possession of males and females on the left and right sides respectively. It is therefore described as strange. Throbbing movements of the right- and left-sided limbs in women and men respectively herald misfortune (‘aṅgadakṣiṇabhāge tu śastaṃ prasphuraṇaṃ bhavet || na śastaṃ tu tathā vāme --- | - - - sphuraṇaṃ tathā || viparyyayeṇābhihitaṃ savye strīṇāṃ śubhaṃ bhavet |’, Agni Purāṇa, 227, from verse 7 till end of the chapter). 


#========
Canto20


1. Meanwhile, the celestial hordes, desirous as it were of gambling with the lives of the arrogant Asuras, began to diligently build a chariot – characterized by a clever axle mechanism/rolling of dice - for Shiva, enemy of the Puras.[1]
2. And then, at the behest of the gods, the Earth herself became the chariot with the lofty hoods of the serpent (Shesha) taking on the appearance of reins hanging down freely from it. 
3. The naturally outstretched rivers, which were fastened to the chariot’s shank, spun around, evoking constant wonder due to their association with sentient wheels/Chakravaka birds[2]
4. Thickly glued to one another as if by the sticky ichor of the Guardian Elephants, the cardinal and intermediary directions alike became the chariot’s constituent blocks.
5. Ascending the moon-crested God’s chariot, the multitudinous stars became its (iron) enclosure, covered in a white blanket through their very own impenetrable rays.[3]
6. The planets graced the chariot’s proximity/eleventh position by becoming the axletree. But it was seen that prosperity of every kind came to the residents of heaven right away. [4]
7. Dharma, Artha, and Kama together assumed the office of a bamboo pole/triple-staffed Sannyasis in the chariot, adorned by the moon-crested Supreme Lord who himself represented Moksha.[5]
8. Blazing brightly by embracing the light of the Moon, whose role as a wheel had just the commenced, Medicinal Herbs took firm root here and there on the chariot.[6]
9. The sun and the moon donned the role of wheels in that chariot. The Danava chieftains simultaneously suffered heat/sorrow and cold/stupefaction due to the light emitted by them.[7]
10.  There was nocturnal darkness on one side and daylight on the other. Its frame suffused by both, the chariot put on the semblance of the fabulous Lokaloka mountain.[8] 
11.  At last, Day learnt about Night’s form and Night about Day’s character by coming together in Shiva’s chariot and occupying its two sides.[9]
12.  Freely fashioning fearsome, out-of-the-blue flags with their lightning bolts, the apocalyptic Samvartaka clouds adorned the chariot by assuming the shape of a yoke/a shape suited for the end of an eon.[10]
13.  Day and night took simultaneous possession of the chariot; the sun and the full moon forged a mutual alliance. In this way, though everything was incompatible with everything else (in the chariot), an unusual unity seemed to develop among them.[11]
14.  How strange! Even at that time (of transformation), the Samvartaka clouds did not breach the boundaries of their nature in any way since their form aligned with the end of the (chariot’s) yoke/an eon.[12]
15.  Due to their close association with the apocalyptic clouds that were stationed in the yoke, the stars in the chariot’s enclosure appeared like a shower of huge hailstones. 
16.  Wiped with the tips of lightning-hands by the water-bearing, apocalyptic clouds, the sky shone in its praiseworthy role as the yoke of Shiva’s chariot.[13]
17.  In the stately car of Shiva, whose (forehead) eye taught the ways of widowhood to Kama’s wife, Courage and Wisdom transformed into the linchpin by blending perfectly with Fixedness and Humility.[14]  
18.  Mimicking the smoke – interspersed with sparks - of the future arrow of Pura’s Foe, the sky – scattered with stars – put on the appearance of the chariot’s chequered enclosure.[15]
19.  Emitting copious froth from their mouths as if it were the ambrosia which they had previously consumed, Indra, Varuna, Kubera, and Yama took charge as the stallions/bearers of the chariot.[16]
20.  As Indra attained equinity, he was beheld with bemusement by Ucchaishravas, his very own horse. And, Yama too, now transformed into a stallion, was seen with angry discomfort by the buffalo (literally, ‘the horse’s enemy’) that is his vehicle.[17] 
21.  Kubera, the king of Kimpurushas, who had put on the guise of a horse for pulling the Great Lord’s chariot, was seen by the horse-faced Kinnara ladies with elongated eyes that reached as far as their ear margins.[18]
22.  His equine form characterized by the presence of a lucky lock of curly hair/whirlpools and his every limb covered in foaming froth, Varuna, the presiding lord of waters, sported a body that was in accordance with his office.[19]
23.  As they (i.e., Indra and others) transformed into horses, the horse-faced Lord of speech (i.e., Vishnu, as Hayagriva) desired, without a doubt, to turn himself completely into a horse so he could become capable of bearing the chariot (of Shiva)/gain prominence.
24.  The (dark) Kuhu and Sinivali and the (bright) Raka and Anumati transformed into the yoking strap. This resulted in a confluence of darkness and moonlight, which caused pain and pleasure alike to the Chakoras.[20]
25.  The imperishable chariot looked magnificent due to its reins - truth, austerity, prosperity, and enterprise themselves - though it led to the rise of falsehood, unrestraint, deprivation, and lassitude among the enemies.[21]
26.  Shiva’s blazing/sun-like chariot, which carried a heavy responsibility on its back/was a source of livelihood for the thighless Aruna, evaded description: It robbed the three Cities of their light with its quartet of reins/ vibrant rays.[22]
27.  The chariot, its colourful cloth banners fluttering in the wind, appeared to kindle the fire of Shiva’s arrow by waving numerous palmyra fans. 
28.  Resembling the lolling tongues of Death that were getting ready for an unprecedented feast, the chariot’s flags fluttered about to make the hearts of the enemies flutter too, or so it seemed.[23] 
29.  Fastened above with rainbows and lightning streaks, the moon-crested God’s chariot/letter announced that the time for the peacocks - the Daityas’ headless trunks – to revel in dance was not far away.[24]
30.  Lauded by hundreds of hymns/well-versed in hundreds of Saman chants, the moon-crested/Soma-bearing Lord, who takes the form of the sacrificer and who was enraged at the Cities/had performed sacrifices in cities, readily stocked the chariot’s platform with weapons/sanctified the sacred altar with invocations.[25]
31.  That very staff of Brahma, which was stationed by the gods as a footman on one side of Shiva’s chariot, befell upon the Daityas in the form of a frightening curse pronounced by sages.
32.  On the other (three) sides of Lord Shiva’s chariot, Kalarudra, Danda, and Jvara took up the role of footmen.[26]
33.  Offering, as it were, a bloody oblation of his (angry red) side glances in the fire of heroism so as to cast an evil spell on the Puras, Atharvan stood proudly by the side of the chariot as its guard.[27]
34.  Its other wheel was protected by Angiras, the foremost of sages, whose progeny is a constant obstacle to the god-hating Asuras in reaching Indrahood.[28]
35.  Beholding their naturally familiar abode - the faces of Brahma, who was the charioteer - the Samans, accompanied by the Puranas and the Rks, marched forward with unmatched speed.[29]
36.  The particularly lively-limbed Yajus hymns, along with the Itihasas that wielded sparkling weapons, occupied its rear end and readily took charge  of protecting it.[30]
37.  The Utterances whose body is the word; heart, the sentence; and the manner of attire, the valid means of knowledge; and which adorn the scholar’s mouth served the chariot in the capacity of an accompanying retinue.[31]
38.  Attaining blessedness, the fourteenfold, cherished Knowledge Domains – farthest boundaries of scholarship’s sweet stream – came together as one in aiding its function.[32] 
39.  The divine syllable Om – in which the three Causes, dismissing (their individual abodes, namely) the lotus, ocean, and mountain, merge with one another in perpetual unity – became its forepart.[33] 
40.  The Year was fixed on the bow of Pura’s Foe like an arrow. Its speed grew in stages, thanks to the unimpeded advance of the numerous bright and dark halves of the month/feathers (attached to it).[34] 
41.  Because of the placement of the Year (transformed into an arrow) on the bow, the bowstring – having come in contact with the winter and summer seasons – was so rendered intolerable it seemed as if the effect (i.e., cold and heat) of the moon and the fire in the arrow-to-be had already become manifest.[35]
42.  Vishnu became the arrow of the crescent-crested Shiva, seemingly in view of the long-drawn training he already had in flying fast on the wings of the bird (i.e., Garuda) that is his mount.[36] 
43.  Having transformed into an arrow, Vishnu flaunted the fire enshrined before him as if it were the dense lustre of the Kaustubha gem which, though kept hidden from view (in his transformed state), was shining forth spontaneously.[37]
44.  Blazing brightly at the arrow’s tip with masses of flames in their hundreds, Swaha’s spouse seemed to readily perform a lamp-waving ritual on the occasion of Shiva’s military march.[38]
45.  The Moon too made the fire of the Moon-crested Lord’s arrow his abode, nourishing the world of beings with his ambrosia that melted away in the heat of the fire at hand.[39] 
46.  Sporting a steadily surging fire in its tip/ahead, the moon-/Soma-bearing Arrow desired to make the Cities its final offering in the Trident-handed God’s fury/sacrifice.[40]
47.  When Vidhu (Vishnu) himself desired to become the arrow and Vidhu (the moon) too was present in front of him, how could the Cities, which were vanquished by the two, not be termed ‘vanquished by the Vidhus’/meet with their ruin?[41]
48.  It was clearly established at the very beginning of creation that sustenance is the duty of Vishnu, the sole conqueror of the world. Strange is the saga of the Puras, in whose case even he took the lead to carry out the task of annihilation.[42]
49.  Since it is widely known that the arrow of Shiva, destroyer of the five-arrowed Kama, is Vishnu/blunt, the moon seemed to quench it in its ambrosial fluid after the fire had heated it up.[43]
50.  Furnished with the moon and fire, the arrow of the all-encompassing Shiva, who is without a second, brought together in one place the mutually opposed attributes of cold and heat.[44]
51.  Why must the Lord, whose handsome neck is home to a dark blue glow/the splendour of swordness, over whose head lies the crescent moon/crescent-tipped arrow, and from whose third eye emanate flames/weapons aplenty, wield other weapons in vain?[45]  
52.  In this way, having made Vishnu, fire, and moon his missile, the eight-formed Primeval Being amused himself by playing with his very own varied forms.[46]
53.  Since Shiva, the sole conqueror of the three worlds, had thoroughly routed out even Death and Desire with his side-glances alone, what was it that could become his weapon at that time?[47] 
54.  In his form as Bhairava, he repeatedly devours the three worlds like it is some child’s play. So what great excitement could he possibly have for destroying the three (trivial) cities before him?
55.  That very Shiva, who had plucked off Brahma’s head with the tip of his fingernail as if he were tearing a lotus stalk, entertained himself with paraphernalia such as chariot, armor, and arrow in the case of the Puras.[48] 
56.  And then, letting his side-glance fall on the faces of all the gods, who were busy singing his praises wholeheartedly, Lord Shiva – adorned with the crest-ornament of the baby moon’s digit - exuded elegance as he stood on his chariot, having vowed to carry out the Yajna of Asura massacre all by himself.[49]
57.  I believe the Sharnga-wielding Vishnu, who bends down readily and regularly in reverential devotion, must have felt embarrassed before the Master of the three worlds, because of being suddenly stretched straight in the process of becoming an arrow/a supplicant, all the while praising the mountain’s predicament as the bow that is sure to bend (in the near future).[50]
58.  The Lord flaunted a triad of luminaries/mansions: the sun and the moon in front of his chariot wheels and the flaming fire in his arrow. What was surprising, however, is that, by doing so, he wished to destroy the three Puras/cities and thereby firmly establish his fame in the three worlds.[51] 
59.  And then, the moon-crested Lord, who was fully prepared to discharge the hero’s vow, ascended the chariot,  the snakes clinging to his each and every limb giving the appearance of an iron armor and the stream of Ganga on his head, with its tumultuous waves rising high, conjuring up a crown.[52]
60.  As the Foe of the Puras, who was eager to grant the enemies a mere nominal existence by employing his fiery-natured arrow, climbed the chariot with an outpouring of steady, surplus courage, his attendants kept gazing and gazing with renewed curiosity at the Kalakuta poison on his throat, mistaking it for an iron chest guard.[53]
61.  Brahma, the poet whose compositions are the Vedas and who is forever seated in a famed, chariot-like lotus – characterized by absolute supremacy (among lotuses) because of its (preeminent) seeds/axles that facilitate the pace of horses; specially favored by the sun and therefore approached by Lakshmi in all her glory/appearing majestic on account of being specially furnished with strong reins, and captivating the eyes with its flow of nectar/blinding the sight with vast clouds of dust – became the charioteer in the Lord’s well-harnessed chariot.[54]
62.  Even its charioteer, like its row of horses, beamed with pride before the Blessed Lord – Chastiser of the Puras – due to the attainment of four-facedness. Was there, therefore, anyone in whose heart the chariot did not evoke curiosity?[55] 
63.  As regards the car of the Lord, who is the enemy of the Puras and a creator of miracles, the friend/sun attained the state of a foe/wheel, Bana’s foe (i.e., Vishnu) became Bana/an arrow, the expedient of appeasement/Sama Veda marched in the forefront and began discharging punishment/the duty of an army, and the old/Puranas gained vitality by occupying the vanguard position.[56]
64.  The angry redness of the Lord’s cheeks was scarcely visible amidst the bright glow of the flames emanating from his fiery frontal eye. And his evidently scary eyebrows too were simulated by a multitude of swaying, outstretched hoods of the black cobras adorning his crown.[57]
65.  As the Lord of the Universe, gripped by a wrathful desire to burn down the trifling Puras, set out on his military expedition, the apocalyptic Samvartaka clouds, drifting in front of the chariot, resembled an orchestra of deeply resonating drums that were beaten on the occasion, the lightning bolts adhering to them rivalling golden sticks.[58]
________________
[1]The dative case in ‘purāraye’ is according to the rule ‘kriyayā coddeśye’. Gambling involves playing with dice (JR)
[2]The idea in the verse is based on the two meanings of the word ‘rathāṅga’, namely, ‘wheel’ and ‘Cakravāka bird’. The cause for wonder is the sentience of wheels. To understand why the wheels are sentient, we must invoke the second meaning of ‘Cakravāka bird’. 
[3]‘Varūtha’ is an iron enclosure around the chariot. Like an armour, it protects the chariot-rider from being hit by his enemy’s weapons (‘parapraharaṇābhirakṣārthaṃ rathasya sannāhavadāvaraṇakādi dravyaṃ yat’, Śabdakalpadruma).
[4]‘Upānta’ refers to the 11th (penultimate) house in the horoscope. All planets (grahas) are beneficial when present in this house. JR quotes Varahamihira on this point – ‘sarve’pyupānte śubhāḥ’, Bṛhatsaṃhitā, 103.4. Bhattotpala, in his commentary on Bṛhatsaṃhitā, explains – The penultimate house is the house close to the 12th, i.e., it is the 11th house. In this house, all, i.e., the sun and the other grahas, are beneficial (‘antyasya dvādaśasya samīpamupāntyamekādaśasthānam | tatrāpyupānte sarva eva sūryādayaḥ śubhāḥ |’). Though a beneficial confluence of grahas was seen near the chariot, it was the heaven that reaped the benefits. JR identifies the trope in this verse as ‘Asaṅgati’, in which the cause is described as being present in one place and the effect as occurring elsewhere (‘kāryakāraṇayordeśabhedaḥ’).
[5]‘Triveṇu’ occupies the forepart of a chariot and is comprised of (?) three bamboo sticks (‘trayo veṇavo yatra | rathamukhasthāvayavabhede |’,  Vācaspatya). In this verse, the poet describes the coming together of all the four life goals (Puruṣārthas) in the chariot. Since the word ‘triveṇu’ also refers to triple-staffed Sannyasis, whose life goal it is to seek mokṣa – freedom from the cycle of birth and death – it is appropriate to describe Shiva (standing in the vicinity of the ‘triveṇu’) as representing the mokṣa they seek. 
[6]One of the names of the moon is ‘Oṣadhipati’ - ‘lord of medicinal herbs’. The herbs are supposed to be nourished by the moon (‘puṣṇāmi cauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ somo bhūtvā rasātmakaḥ’, 15.13). Here the moon and the medicinal herbs stand respectively for a lover and his many sweethearts, who glow with joy when embraced by him (JR).
[7]‘Bhujaṅga’ is commonly used by Mankha in the sense of ‘lover’ (also see 1.23, 7.47, 11.69, 12.26, 12.55, 12.74, 16.7, and 20.58). 
[8]Lokāloka is a mountain that is supposed to encircle the earth. It is bright on one side where it is lit by the sun’s rays and dark on the other where it is unlit. It is described as a place that is not inhabited by anyone and from which no object that is thrown reappears (‘mahīmāveṣṭya prākāravat sthite girau lokāloka iti svanāmakhyāte | antarlokyate sūryaraśhmibhiḥ spṛśyamānatvāt iti lokaḥ | tathā bahiḥ sūryakiraṇāsparśāt a lokyata iti alokaḥ |’, Śabdakalpadruma; ‘yasyāṃ padārthaḥ prahito na kiñcitpratyudīte || ataḥ sarvaprāṇisaṅgharahitā sā ca nārada | lokāloka iti vyākhyā yadatra parikalpitā || (Devībhāgavata, 8.14.3-4).
[9]Day and night also stand here for a lover and his beloved, who learn about each other by becoming close to each other (JR).
[10]‘Saṃvartaka’ refers to a  class of clouds appear at the end of a yuga (as in ‘gaṇaṃ saṃvartakaṃ nāma meghānāṃ cāntakāriṇām’, Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 10.25.2). 
[11]The unity was a result of coming together in one place (i.e., the chariot) and a singularity of purpose (i.e., to destroy the Tripuras) (JR). 
[12]Both this and verse 12 above are based on the pun in the word ‘yuga’, which means ‘yoke’ as well as ‘end of an eon’. 
[13]The parasmaipada aorist form ‘adyutat’ in of the ātmanepada root ‘dyut’ is according to the rule ‘dyudbhyo luṅi’.  
[14]Śamyā is a linchpin that keeps the chariot together and prevents its disintegration into parts (‘rathaviśarārutānivṛttyarthaṃ kīlikā’, JR). 
[15]The sky stands for smoke and the stars for its sparks 
[16]The comparison of froth with ambrosia is based on their common quality of whiteness.   
[17]The buffalo has a natural hatred for horses, wherefore one of the names for the former is ‘aśvāri’.  
[18]The poet seems to suggest that the horse-faced Kinnara ladies were attracted to Kubera, who had transformed into a horse (cf. ‘mārgopānte - - - vīkṣya vrīḍānatānāṃ pratikuharamukhaṃ kinnarīṇāṃ mukhāni | --- vāhānāṃ’, Sūryaśataka, 48, in which Mayura describes the Kinnara ladies as bending their heads in shyness on seeing the handsome horses of the Sun god).  The Kinnaras and Kimpuruśas are semi-divine beings who wait upon Kubera. The former have a human body with a horse’s face while the latter have a horse’s body with a human face (‘kimpuruṣaḥ aśvākārajaghanaḥ narākāramukhaḥ, kinnarastu aśvākāravadanaḥ narākārajaghanaḥ iti tayorbhedaḥ’, Vācaspatya)
[19]‘Āvarta’ is a lock of curled hair seen in horses. Ten such locks are mentioned – two on the head, two on the breast, two between the belly and the navel, two above that, one on the forehead, and one in the anal region/below the upper lip (‘dvāvurasyau śirasyau dvau dvau dvau randhroparandhrayoḥ | eko bhāle hyapāne ca daśāvartā dhruvāḥ smṛtāḥ’, quoted by Mallinatha in his commentary on Śiśupālavadha, 5.4; Varahamihira gives ‘prapāṇa’ instead of apāna in Bṛhatsaṃhitā, 66.4)
[20]Kuhū is the new-moon night (when the moon is not seen) and Sinīvālī is the night before (when the moon is slightly visible); likewise, Rākā is the full-moon night and Anumati is the night before (when the moon is one digit short of completion) (JR). The Cakoras subsist on moonlight.
[21]By leading to the rise of falsehood, etc., in the enemies, it brought about their moral downfall. 
[22]An apparent contradiction in describing the sun-like chariot as robbing the enemy’s cities of light with its rays (‘raśmi’). The contradiction must be resolved by taking the alternate meaning of the word ‘raśmi’ as reins. There is a quartet of reins because the chariot is borne by four horses. ‘Anūruvṛtti’ must be split as ‘anu’ + ‘ūruvṛtti’ (‘on the back’ + ‘heavy responsibility’) in the case of the chariot and as ‘anūru’ + ‘vṛtti’ (‘the thighless Aruna + livelihood’) in the case of the sun. Similarly, ‘caturātmabhiḥ’ must be split as ‘catur’ + ‘ātmabhiḥ’ (four in number’) and ‘catura’ + ‘ātmabhiḥ’ (‘possessing a vibrant nature’) with respect to the reins and sunrays respectively. Aruna, the charioteer of the Sun god, is thighless because his mother Vinata hatched her egg prematurely, wherefore he was born incompletely formed (‘aṇḍaṃ bibheda vinatā tatra putramapaśyata | pūrvārdhakāyasampannamitareṇāprakāśatā ||, Mahābhārata, 1.16.17).
[23]JR explains ‘nyāda’ as ‘niḥśeṣeṇādanam’ (‘devouring completely’).
[24]The verse compares Shiva’s chariot with a letter (written on a birch bark paper, etc.) that makes mention of some future event (which, in this case, is the dance of the headless trunks, standing for peacocks) and provides specific details about when such an event will occur (which, here, is the time when rainbows and lightning streaks will be seen) (JR). Such a comparison is made possible through pun; the word ‘patra’ means both ‘chariot’ and ‘letter’. 
[25]A verse that is based on pun throughout: ‘Soma’ is the herb of that name/moon; ‘yajamāna’ is the sentient self, regarded as one of the eight forms of Shiva/Vedic sacrificer; ‘manyu’ is anger/sacrifice; ‘pura’ is the Asuras of Tripura/cities; ‘stotra’ is praise/chants of the Sāma Veda; ‘vedikā’ is the chariot’s platform/sacred sacrificial altar; and ‘śastra’ is weapon/a collection of hymns from the Sāma Veda.
[26]Kālarudra, Daṇḍa, and Jvara are personifications of time, punishment, and affliction (exemplified by fever) respectively. Kālarudra is Shiva-Rudra in his form as the all-destroying time (‘kālaḥ kālarūpaḥ sarvasaṃhārako rudraḥ’, Śabdakalpadruma); Jvara owes its origin to Shiva’s anger (see footnote under 17.47).
[27]The Atharva Veda deals with rituals aimed at causing harm (such as death) to one’s enemy through the use of spells (abhicārakarma). Offering blood as oblation is part of such rituals (JR).
[28]Angiras is one of the ten sons of Brahma, born from his mouth (‘athābhidhyāyataḥ sargaṃ daśa putrāḥ prajajñire | - - - aṅgirā mukhataḥ ||’, Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 3.12.21, 24). His wife, Shraddha, gave birth to four daughters, named Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka, and Anumati (see footnote under 20.24 above) and two sons, Utathya and Brihaspati (‘śraddhā tvaaṅgirasaḥ patnī catasro’sūta kanyakāḥ | sinīvālī kuhū rākā caturthyanumatistathā || tatputrāvaparāvāstāṃ - - - utathyo - - - brahmiṣṭhaśca bṛhaspaiḥ ||, Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 4.1.34, 35) 
[29]The Vedas were born from the mouths of Brahma (JR). The repetition of syllables ‘sā’, ‘mā’, and ‘nya’ in the second line of the verse is an instance of the sound-based trope Yamakālaṅkāra.
[30]Another instance of Yamakālaṅkāra, effected through the repetition of ‘sa’, ‘he’, ‘ti’, ‘hā’, and ‘saiḥ’. In one instance, the string of syllables must be read as ‘sa-heti-hāsaiḥ’ and in the other instance, as ‘saha’ + ‘itihāsaiḥ’.
[31]The word is compared to the body because it is the first to be perceived; the sentence is compared to the heart because it is understood through the word and holds primacy; the valid means of knowledge is compared to the manner of attire since, like the latter, it is a product of deliberation (JR).
[32]The fourteenfold knowledge domains include the four Vedas, the six Vedāngas, and four Śāstras (Purāṇa, Ānvīkṣikī, Mīmāṃsā, and Smṛtitantra (‘caturdaśa vidyāsthānāni, yaduta vidyāścatvāraḥ, ṣaḍangāni, catvāri śāstrāṇi ityācāryāḥ’, Kāvyamīmāṃsā, chapter 1; also ‘angāni vedāścatvāro mīmāṃsā nyāyavistaraḥ | purāṇaṃ dharmaśāstraṃ ca vidyā hyetāścaturdaśa’, quoted by JR)
[33]The three Causes are Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, whose respective abodes are lotus, ocean, and mountain, and who represent the sounds ‘a’, ‘u’, and ‘m’ respectively in the divine syllable Om (JR).
[34]The year is likened to Shiva’s arrow and the bright and dark halves of the month to the feathers attached to it.
[35]See verse 20.45 below for the role played by Soma w.r.t Shiva’s arrow. 
[36]An arrow’s speed is also aided by the feathers attached to it (JR). 
[37]Though Vishnu had kept the Kaustubha gem hidden from view in his transformed state as Shiva’s arrow, its irrepressible glow manifested as the arrow’s fiery radiance.  
[38]Swāhā’s spouse is fire. 
[39]JR’s commentary for this verse is not available. 
[40]The arrow is personified as a Vedic sacrificer, carrying the Soma herb and making a final oblation of the Tripuras in the fire of Shiva’s fury (JR).
[41]The verse plays on the words ‘vidhu’ (Vishnu/moon) and ‘vidhvasta’ (‘ruined’/‘vanquished by Vishnu and moon’) (JR).
[42]It was Vishnu, who in the form of Shiva’s arrow, brought about the destruction of theTripuras. 
[43]‘Pānakriyā’ is the process of dipping a heated object in water. Blunt metallic objects are sharpened by this process (JR).  
[44]The qualifier ‘advaitamūrti’ (explained by JR as ‘nirdvandva’ and ‘viśvamaya’, which mean ‘secondless’ and ‘all-encompassing’) is significant: Shiva, being himself all-encompassing and secondless, could easily bring about a reconciliation of mutually opposed attributes.  
[45]Through the use of pun, the poet describes Shiva as intrinsically possessing various weapons and therefore not in need of them without. The word ‘asitā’ must be taken as an adjective (meaning ‘dark blue’) of ‘śrīḥ’ (‘glow’) in one case and as an abstract noun (meaning ‘swordness’) in the other. 
[46]The fire and moon are included among the eight forms of Shiva; Vishnu and Shiva are described as assuming each other’s form (e.g., ‘śivāya viṣṇurūpāya viṣṇave śivarūpiṇe’, Padma Purāṇa, 6.138.14). 
[47]The purport is that there was nothing in the world which had the capacity to become Shiva’s weapon; the weapons (bow and arrow) wielded by Shiva while destroying the Tripuras functioned merely as appendages while it was his very own indomitable spirit that was the true cause of victory.
[48]Refer footnote under 17.33; Cf ‘rathaḥ kṣoṇī yantā - - - tripuratṛṇamāḍambaravidhiḥ’, Śivamahimnaḥ stotra, 18). The purport of the verse is that the destruction of the Tripuras is inevitable (JR).
[49]JR explains ‘danujadhvaṃsadīkṣaikasattrī’ as ‘endlessly initiating (the world) into the vow of Asura massacre’ (i.e., repeatedly rendering the world free of Asuras). 
[50]Vishnu’s embarrassment is due to the fact that he can no longer bend down before Shiva after transforming into his arrow (by pun, also ‘even after transforming into his supplicant’). He praises Mt. Mandara because it has the good fortune of bending before Shiva after becoming his bow (in spite of being a mountain, and therefore, naturally rigid). The poet’s use of the word ‘Śārṅgapāṇi’ (‘Wielder of the Śārṅga bow’) for Vishnu is significant. An apparent contradiction is brought out by describing the wielder of a bow as transforming into an arrow. The word ‘tribhuvanaguru’ (‘Master of the three worlds’), used for Shiva, indicates that he is worthy of being bowed down to.  
[51]What is surprising is that someone who owns three mansions (‘dhāma’) wishes to destroy three cities and establish his fame in the three worlds (JR). The apparent contradiction in this description must be resolved by considering the alternative meaning of ‘dhāma’, which is ‘luminary’.
[52]The snakes are compared to iron armours because they are dark in colour and adhere closely to the limbs. The crown is multitiered with rows of peaks arranged one above another (‘ato vakṣyāmi makuṭaṃ ---śṛṅgapañcakasaṃyutam || śṛṅgāṇyupari catvāri trīṇi caiva tadūrdhvataḥ | śṛṅgadvayaṃ tatparaṃ taduparyekaṃ ca śṛṅgakam ||’ Aparājitapṛcchā, 236.58, 59) The waves of Ganga, some tall and some short, can therefore create the semblance of a crown. 
[53]The comparison of the poison Kālakūta with an iron chest guard is due to their shared black colour; also, the poison’s dark glow can extend beyond the neck and pervade the chest below, thereby strengthening the comparison further. The phrase ‘racayituṃ nāmāvaśeṣān dviṣaḥ’ - ‘to leave the enemies with nothing more than their names’ - is a roundabout way of saying ‘to kill the enemies’. 
[54]This punning verse likens Shiva’s chariot to Brahma’s lotus abode so as to poetically establish that Brahma felt at home with his new office as Shiva’s charioteer. JR sometimes explains the word ‘rajaḥ’/‘parāga’ (‘pollen dust’) as ‘makaranda’ (‘floral nectar’) (see also 6.12, 10.32). The word ‘sūte’ must be split as ‘su’+‘ūte’ (‘in the well-harnessed’) (JR).
[55]Since the number of horses tied to the chariot is four, the row of horses is four-faced; Brahma, the charioteer, is four-faced in any case. The element of curiosity is because the charioteer and the horses he controls resemble one another.
[56]The qualifier ‘creator of miracles’ (‘vismayavedhāḥ’) used for Shiva is significant since it provides an explanation for the contradictions in the rest of the verse (such as the friend turning into a foe, Bana’s foe transforming into Bana, and the expedient of appeasement discharging punishment) (JR). It is only a ‘creator of miracles’ who can synthesise mutually contradictory elements. From a poetic perspective, the contradictions are only apparent and can be otherwise resolved by taking recourse to the alternative meanings of words such as ‘ari’ (enemy/wheel), ‘bāṇa’ (the Asura Bana/arrow), ‘sāma’ (appeasement/Sāma Veda), and ‘daṇḍa’ (punishment/army). 
[57]In the first part of the verse, it is the shared colour (redness) that is the cause of concealment; in the second part, it is colour and shape (JR).
[58]The clouds resemble military drums and the lightning streaks, the sticks for beating them. 

#========
Canto21

1. Thereafter, seeing the moon-crested Lord set out against his enemies, the army of the Ganas bustled with activity in every nook and corner as it went about preparing for the battle. 
2. It is not surprising that Shiva’s warriors attained glory by routing out the enemies since the army of the Universal Master was accompanied by Virabhadra/sported the warrior’s glory from the very start.[1]
3. Even though the Pinaka-holder’s victory is not dependent on others, his army still got ready for the battle by putting on armours. Don’t even the sunstones glow before the sun as he sets about suppressing darkness with a mere ray?[2] 
4. One of the Ganas of Shiva called Mahakala (literally ‘very dark’) wore a complexion that went far beyond his name, thanks to the lustre of his sword, his iron armour, and the radiant glow of his angrily contorted eyebrows.[3]
5. Kumara exhibited an extraordinary skill in maintaining his posture by stabilizing himself when his peacock-mount danced to the war drum’s rippling roar that resembled the rumbling of clouds.[4]
6. Marching right in the front, the elephant-faced Ganesha upset those walking behind him since they skid and fell at every step along the way that was made slushy by the trickling stream of his ichor. 
7. As he strode ahead of the Lord in the dense, dusty darkness of the army, Ganesha – the Celestial River’s son – seemed to be carrying a hand-held lamp masquerading as his sharp tusk, which was covered with the red vermillion adorning his temples.[5]
8. Flapping his ears in the manner of palmyra fans and spraying the surroundings with water droplets emitted from his trunk, Ganesha greatly allayed the journeying troop’s extreme exhaustion all along the way.
9. Shaken up by gusts of wind springing from the flapping of his ears, the powdered vermilion smeared over Ganesha’s temples made him shut his eyes; he only opened them grudgingly once in a while to catch a glimpse of the road ahead. 
10. The multitude of slender swords which the Ganas held in their hands wrought poisonous affliction on the enemies as if it were a moving mass of radiant rays rippling forth from Shiva’s throat.[6]
11. The Directions reverberated with the echo of the army’s cheerful outcry as if, abandoning their silence, they were singing auspicious songs before Pura’s Foe on the festive occasion of his military march.[7]
12. Unhindered in its speed,  the celestial army/river made a lot of noise, both in front of Shiva and on his head, at the time of his glorious march.
13. Thanks to the long-drawn rows of bees rushing towards them due to the fragrance of their sportive lotuses, even the deer-eyed women accompanying the army appeared to be holding outstretched swords in their soft, sprout-like hands.
14. The Lord’s army gained a foothold on the peaks of the Crystal Mountain by being reflected on them, thus assuming, as it were, a plurality of bodies in its strong desire for exterminating the enemies. 
15. Ganesha, who was intoxicated in rut, put his very own army into disarray because every warrior’s elephant went berserk all over the place after smelling the odour of his ichor.[8] 
16. Listening to the roar of the war drums, which resembled the thunder of clouds, Kumara’s peacock began to dance. Instructed, as it were, by it, the headless trunks of the enemies took to dancing too. 
17. Supported on mountainous terrains by wheels that each sparkled with the sheen of inlaid crystals and rubies, the chariots of others too seemed to possess the moon and the sun for their wheels.[9] 
18. Matchless was the magnificent glow of Shiva as he marched against the Asura tribe; a glow, in whose spreading expanse, the sun and the moon, disguised as chariot wheels, vanished without a trace!
19. The universe turned topsy-turvy at that time! For, the Serpent Lord, who is Shiva’s ornament, occupied the very top; the earth, which assumed the form of a chariot, shone beneath him; and the sun and the moon were reduced to the state of the chariot’s wheels.[10] 
20. How very sad! Freeing the hem of his robe from the hand of his deer-eyed beloved hesitantly, a certain warrior, who left in a hurry, could barely stop himself from turning back a little every now and then just after taking a few quick steps.[11] 
21. Having received a secret embrace from his unrelentingly anxious sweetheart as she bid him farewell, another warrior, who plunged into the ambrosial lake of her affectionate touch, could not emerge out of it readily.[12]
22. A third warrior walked with steps that faltered in joy after he received from his somewhat strong-hearted beloved the provisions for his journey - the ambrosia of her lips - by hugging her tightly. 
23. “Everything will be fine if you quickly return back victorious. Otherwise, we shall meet again in heaven” –so saying, a maiden with roving eyes tried to somehow bid her lover farewell.[13] 
24. “You (evidently) long to embrace the divine damsels after reaching heaven by taking the (hero’s) path of the sword. And I don’t approve of it” – another lady stopped her lover in this manner with words that were marred by harsh-sounding jealousy-laden letters.[14] 
25. Yet another woman stood in the way of her lover. The next moment, her agitated eyes were blinded by tears. And in that brief interval, the lover, subservient solely to his warrior spirit, stealthily left for the battle. 
26. Letting a pair of sorrowful eyes fall on the lover, who was taking leave of her in a hurry, a certain lady seemed to drape him affectionately in a brand new armour with the rippling rays of her black and white side-glances.[15] 
27. Unable to let go of their lovers readily, other women, with long eyes that resembled blue lotuses, carried on pointless conversations for a long time in words shaken by fear.[16]   
28. A certain man, standing before his distressed beloved to bid her a gentle farewell, seemed to continuously sow, through the gleam of his drawn-out sword, the similarly hued darkness of sorrowful separation in her eyes.[17] 
29. Established firmly in the practice of love’s vow,  some pretty-eyed maidens voluntarily followed their lovers, whose faces were besmeared with specks of brilliance as if with magical ointments for charming Lady Victory. 
30. Interspersed with white parasols, the spreading glow of the army’s unsheathed swords appeared like the nether world’s dense darkness tossed up along with Shesha’s hoods when the earth was transforming into a chariot.[18] 
31. In the creeping vine of Shiva’s battalion, the white parasols put on the semblance of flower clusters teeming with bees, or so it seemed, thanks to the sheen of the army’s numerous swords alighting on them. 
32. In front of Lord Shiva, who had attained prestigious lordship over the speech of the Devas/Sanskrit language, the Ganas/verb classes, characterized by boundless activity/the ability to evolve innumerable derivatives, exhibited a peerless abundance of festive joy in so many ways/sophistication in the definition of diverse root words.[19] 
33. Through an exuberant display of swords that resembled Death’s darkly knit eyebrows, the Army seemed to bedeck itself with black cobras by taking cue from the behaviour of its master (i.e., Shiva).[20] 
34. As the moon-crested Lord marched ahead, the sun’s orb, which had assumed the role of a chariot wheel, took its position beneath him, whereby his parasol, spread over by sunrays, cast its shadow higher and higher up.[21] 
35. The moon that adorns the crest of the Lord of the Universe gazed at the resplendent white parasol raised above his crown with envy, mistaking it for a second, and full-orbed, moon approaching it.[22] 
36. Rahu was beside himself with immense pride on seeing the sun and the moon occupying a Samasaptaka position, facing one another in the chariot. But his fear resurfaced when he beheld Vishnu transform into Shiva’s arrow.[23] 
37. As it travelled with immense speed along the path of the celestials, Shiva’s chariot still allowed the Sun to preside over his realm (i.e., the sky) even though he was transformed into a wheel at present. 
38. When the Lord’s chariot hit the skies, the sun and the moon, having assumed the form of its wheels, rose simultaneously. Could the Asuras ask for a worse omen than this? 
39. Thus sped the moon-crested God’s chariot across the endless celestial path that even the war-obsessed minds of the Gana hordes were left far behind.[24]  
40. The wives of the Ganas, marching on either sides of Shiva’s chariot, repeatedly exchanged their positions to overcome the discomfort, caused by the cold and heat resulting, respectively, from an accumulation of the rays of the sun and the moon, transformed into wheels at the moment.
41. Though it was marching in the sky, the army threw up much dust, thanks to the wind-blown powder of the fancy pearl necklaces of the battalion’s doe-eyed beauties that were pulverized by rubbing against one another in the sudden crowd.
42. Shiva’s army, the very bedrock of woeful widowhood to the enemy’s womenfolk, was equipped with countless horny bows that appeared like the horns, displayed in aggression, by the herd of Death’s sportive buffalo mounts as he (i.e., Death) worked endlessly towards exterminating the enemy warriors. 
43. As if it were the threatening index finger of Death, who took this resolve “I shall quickly quash the arrogant Puras”, each and every spear that the soldiers in Shiva’s army held in their hands became an instructor to the enemies in the agonizing experience of fear.[25] 
44. No sooner did the brave Ganas in the vanguard rush to the highway brandishing their swords than the pretty-browed women in the citadels of Tripura readily drowned in a flooding stream of tears due to panic, or so it seemed.[26]
45. As the naturally sprightly soldiers of Shiva, conqueror of the universe, wreaked one havoc after another in the vicinity of the Asura cities, it seemed as if the latter, gripped by overwhelming fear, had shut their eyes under the pretext of their locked gates.[27] 
46. Their row of flag-arms flung high in the air, the cities of the Asuras seemed to cry out “Help! Help!” through the loud bang caused by the frantic closure of their gates as the soldiers of Shiva forcefully besieged their precincts.[28]  
47. When Shiva’s army entered the utterly terrified cities of the three Puras, even their cluster of cloth banners, shaken by winds, seemed all prepared to run away. 
48. Like snowfall in its effect, the loud bang of Shiva’s battalion drums caused continuous shivering. No sooner did it gain entry into the hearts of the Asura maidens than their ears were forever deprived of their friendship with the blue lotuses adorning them.[29] 
49. Their outlines disappearing in the (dark) glow of the swords brandished bravely by Shiva’s invading warriors, the cities seemed at that moment to slowly enter the mouth of Death. 
50. The blue lotuses tucked behind their ears slipped down; pearl necklaces snapped off their necks; and bejewelled pendants came loose and fell far away from their ears: In this way, due to their panic alone, the Asura women went through an experience that was consistent with their imminent, absolute widowhood when they heard the tumult of Shiva’s army.[30] 
51. No sooner did Tripura’s Foe – with Vishnu transformed into his arrow and Brahma shining in the befitting role of his charioteer – arrive and his well-equipped army draw near than the mansions of the Asuras betrayed perturbed inmates/Sattva, intolerable dust storms/Rajas, and dense darkness/Tamas.[31] 
52. The impenetrable dust that was raised by Shiva’s unstoppable army kissed the Asura women’s cheeks, thus setting the stage for the pallor of widowhood’s separation to manifest on them.[32]   
53. And so, when the army of Shiva, sweetheart of the Mountain Lord’s daughter, drew closer to the Cities, misfortune drew closer too, wherefore the fickle-eyed Asura lasses, their lithe bodies trembling, displayed profuse sweating and intense goosebumps as if Fear itself had made love to them.[33] 




________________
[1]Virabhadra is one among the attendants of Shiva (See footnote under 18.49). The verse plays on the pun in the word ‘vīrabhadra’ that also means ‘warrior’s glory’. 
[2]The word ‘Pināka-holder’ employed for Shiva is appropriate in the context of his victorious exploit. The use of the affix ‘ṇic’ after ‘varma’ in the word ‘saṃvarmayati’ is according to the rule ‘satyāpapāśa - - - varma - - - ādibhyo ṇic’.
[3]Mahakala is one of the names of Shiva too. The Gaṇa named Mahakala was born, along with Bhrngi, another Gana, from Shiva’s seed. Shiva appointed both as his doorkeepers. Mahakala is known for his pitch-black complexion (‘tataḥ - - - svaṃ reto - - - | utsasarja - - - || - - - sambhūtau śaṅkarātmajau | - - - nāma bhṛṅgīti cākarot || mahākṛṣṇaikarūpasya mahākāleti - - - || - - - kramādgaṇeśau kṛtvā tau haro dvāri nyayojayat || (Kālikā Purāṇa, 46.61-66) 
[4]‘Avocata’ (‘spoke’) is used here in the sense of ‘adarśayat’ (‘exhibited’) (JR).
[5]One of the names of Ganesha is Gangeya, the son of Ganga (JR explains ‘surasindhunandanaḥ’ as ‘gāṅgeya’). The story of how Ganesha came to be known as Gangeya is told in the Matsya Purāṇa (‘putretyuvāca taṃ devī putretyūce ca jāhnavī || gāṅgeya iti devaistu pūjito'bhūdgajānanaḥ |’, 154.504, 505). One carries a lamp in one’s hand while walking through darkness; ‘hasta’ stands for both ‘trunk’ and ‘hand’. ‘Pṛtanārajopame’ is not a happy reading from the viewpoint of grammar and meaning; pṛtanārajomaye/pṛtanārajobhare seems to be a better alternative.
[6]The swords of the Ganas resemble the Kālakūṭa poison both in their colour and lethality. They are therefore compared to the rays rippling forth from Shiva’s throat, which is the abode of that poison. 
[7]Courtesans sing songs when a king sets out on a military march. The directions had hitherto maintained silence due to their fear of the Tripuras and also because they are females (The word ‘dik’ – ‘direction’, is in the feminine gender) (JR).
[8]Elephants cannot bear the smell of each other’s ichor (JR). 
[9]The wheels inlaid with crystals and rubies resemble the moon and the sun respectively. ‘Others’ = ‘those other than Shiva’ (JR). 
[10]Shesha, the lord of serpents, lies bottommost; above him, supported on his hoods, is the earth; and higher up are the moon and the sun. In this case, however, the order was reversed (JR).
[11]The lover’s freedom was restricted by memories of love (JR). 
[12]The word ‘sahasā’ (‘readily’) implies that the warrior described here did not get struck in the passionate experience but came back to his senses the very next moment (JR). 
[13]The maiden’s words indicate a resolve to die in case the lover doesn’t return (JR).The adjective ‘taralāyitekṣaṇā’ (‘with roving eyes’) points to her anxiety and helplessness. 
[14]Heroes who die fighting in battle are believed to reach heaven (cf. ‘hato vā prāpsyasi svargam’, Bhagavadgītā, 2.37). Since the lady speaking here is the wife of a Gana warrior (and not a Deva), there is no contradiction in her words, i.e., in claiming that her husband wants to visit heaven.
[15]A black iron armour (‘āyasaṃ kavacam’, JR), probably with white stripes.
[16]The women carried on pointless conversations so as to cause a delay (JR). 
[17]In Sanskrit literature, a sword is generally spoken of as being black in colour.  
[18]Shesha, the lord of serpents, resides in the nether world of Pātāla, and is an epitome of whiteness. The circle of white parasols correspond to Shesha’s hoods and the glow of swords, to the darkness of Pātāla. 
[19]‘Bahudhātulakṣaṇa’ must be split as ‘bahudhā+atula+kṣaṇa’ and ‘bahu+dhatu+lakṣaṇa+prakarṣa’ in its contextual (narrative-related) and non-contextual (grammar-related) meanings respectively. ‘Divyaṃ vacaḥ’ (‘divine speech’) = ‘saṃskṛtavāṇī’ (the Saṃskṛta language) (JR).
[20]The black swords are compared to darkly knit eyebrows and snakes.  
[21]Since the parasol is above and the sun below, the former casts its shadow high up (JR) 
[22]JR gives ‘kilendunā’ as the correct reading instead of ‘śikhendunā’. Since the moon on Shiva’s head is a crescent, it is not logical to say that it was envious at the sight of the parasol, which it fancied as a second full-moon, i.e., if the moon on Shiva’s head were to be the full-moon (which is not the case), it makes sense to describe the parasol as the second full-moon. If we accept the reading ‘kilendunā’ as correct, the verse must be understood differently. In that case, the moon is not the half-moon on Shiva’s head but the full-moon transformed into one of his chariot wheels. This renders the description of the parasol as the second full-moon and the envy of the first moon (i.e., the full-moon in the role of the chariot wheel) perfectly meaningful.   
[23]The sun and the moon face each other in the ‘samasaptaka’ position (‘parasparaṃ sammukhatayā sthitau’, JR), as they are in their present roles of chariot wheels. The samasaptaka position presents the possibility of an eclipse (‘samasaptakasthitayorarkendvoruparāgasambhavāt, JR), wherefore Rahu, who is regarded as causing eclipse, was overjoyed. His joy, however, was short-lived because Vishnu, who had cut off his head in the past, was also present nearby, having transformed himself into Shiva’s arrow (see footnote under 2.2)
[24]The chariot travelled faster than the mind (JR).
[25]One expresses resolve by sticking out the index finger. Since the index finger is also used to threaten someone, the word ‘tarjanī’ (‘the threatening finger’) is a contextually appropriate usage.
[26]Drowning in water (= tears) could be a suicidal response to helplessness brought on by fear.  
[27]Cf. ‘vinirgataṃ mānadamātmamandirāt - - - sasambhramendradrutapātitārgalā nimīlitākṣīva bhiyāmarāvatī’ (from Mankha’s ‘Hayagrīvavadha’, quoted in Kāvyaprakāśa, chapter 1). There is a breach of caesura after the fourth syllable of the second line. 
[28]‘Abrahmaṇyam’ is a exclamatory word that expresses trouble (‘upadravanivedakam’, JR)
[29]Snowfall causes shivering as well as the withering of lotuses. To be deprived forever of ear adornments is to be rendered a widow. 
[30]Widowed women avoid wearing ornaments(JR) 
[31]Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas refers to the three elements (guṇas) that constitute matter (prakṛti); they are presided over by Vishnu, Brahma, and Rudra (a fierce form of Shiva, associated with the annihilation of the universe) respectively (‘rajoguṇamayaṃ cānyadrūpaṃ - - - || caturmukhaḥ - - - || sattvaṃ guṇamupāśritya viṣṇuḥ - - - ||’, Kūrma Purāṇa, 4.50-52; ‘ayaṃ hi bhagavān rudraḥ sarvaṃ jagadidaṃ śivaḥ | tamoguṇaṃ samāśritya kalpānte saṃharetprabhuḥ ||’, ibid. 22.31). 
[32]‘Kacchapa’ is generally used in the sense of ‘tortoise’; here, however, it means ‘fish’ (JR); Kacchapaketu = the Fish-bannered One (i.e., Kama).
[33]‘Prasāda’ should probably be read as ‘pramāda’ (danger) 


#========
Canto22


1. Hearing that the army of Shiva was approaching their beloved Cities from all sides, the Asuras were suddenly filled with intense anger in their mansions.[1] 
2. Though the Moon-crested Lord had not yet discharged his unbridled arrow of fire, Diti’s sons were already burning with anger within.
3. The dark frowns of the Asuras, which were reflected on their shoulders when they gazed at their arms in arrogant pride, took on the appearance of Death’s (serpentine) noose as it expanded to tighten around their necks.[2]
4. As the countenance of the Asuras, who looked frightening in their harsh, explosive anger, got redder and redder, it seemed as if they had been smeared with a paste of red sandalwood in anticipation of Shiva’s fire-bearing shaft.[3]
5. They let their glance, which seemed to spew fire through its red glow, fall on their sword blades that resembled numerous expanded hoods of the serpent-noose in Death’s hand.[4] 
6. Presently, the Asuras carried swords, which, from mirroring their red glances, seemed to be kissed goodbye by Lakshmi’s lotus abode as she prepared to take leave of them.[5]
7. Unstoppable in their ever-growing temper, they brandished their creeper-like swords that seemed to sprout so many branches through the dark frowns reflected on them. 
8. A hole that opened up in the floor when a certain deeply enraged Asura stomped his hand on it mimicked the gaping, cave-like mouth of Death, all set to devour him then and there.
9. Another Asura repeatedly patted his plump shoulder with the front of his angrily brisk palm as if he were beating in advance the drum of his own departure to Death’s capital.[6] 
10.  A third Asura, who kept spinning a discus/wheel with his hand to chop the enemies down, appeared as though he was fashioning a brand new chariot to embark on a journey along Death’s highway.[7]
11.  A continuous trail of smoke that arose in front of an Asura when he rubbed his palms together wore the semblance of a chain hurled by Death for binding him.[8]
12.  A row of old, already healed wounds burst open all of a sudden on the person of another Asura as if it were a series of doors thrown wide for Lady Fortune to make a quick exit.[9]
13.  As he pulled out a sword from the hollow of its scabbard, yet another Asura appeared to bind himself all around in the dark/deadly net of its rays.[10]
14.  Washed away by the spreading sweat, an application of saffron powder dripped here and there from the limbs of some Asuras, who, therefore, seemed to be setting the stage for the impending bloodshed.
15.  A certain Asura, his face hidden temporarily from view by the flooding lustre of a hand-held sword, was seen to cause fear in the Sun, who mistook him for the headless trunk of Rahu.[11]
16.  Profuse sweat, mingled with saffron, dripped from the face of another Asura, making it appear as if his cheek had shared a part of its angry red flush with it.[12]
17.  Thanks to the iron armours covering their bodies, the Asuras, who are naturally jet-black in complexion, were mistaken for the Collyrium Mountain, dotted with dark, newly formed clouds.[13] 
18.  The iron battle armours, which the Asuras donned slowly and carefully, transformed instantly into the crimson robes of execution due to the angry glow of their bloodshot  eyes.[14]
19.  The Asuras looked dazzling in the spreading radiance of their iron coats as if their bodies had been smeared with the thick black slush stuck to the horns of Yama’s buffalo-mount during its playful butting.[15]
20.  The Asuras’ bodies, which naturally resembled fresh clouds in their complexion and sported tightly fitting iron armours, saw a trebling of blackness when dark swords flashed forth.[16]
21.  When the Asuras, clad in blazing armours, came out in large numbers for the battle, Death foresaw an immanent increase in the population of his realm.
22.  The royal parasols, which the Asura chieftains flaunted over their heads, and the breeze, which they enjoyed from the tips of flywhisks, served the sole purpose of alleviating their soaring heat.[17]
23.  The gem-studded black parasols that were raised over the heads of the Asuras put on the steady semblance of Death’s coiled-up serpent noose.[18]
24.  Owing to the reflection of the white flywhisks in their crest gems, the Asuras of the Triple City seemed to sprout ripples of ash on their person even before coming in contact with Shiva’s fire missile.[19]
25.  The Asuras’ row of dark umbrellas, variegated by the lustre of their ruby knobs, took on the appearance of Yama’s wine-filled emerald goblets.[20]
26.  Due to the continuous blare of war trumpets and the closely packed rows of pure white parasols, the Asura army seemed to be suffused with Death’s boisterous laughter.[21] 
27.  As its lord’s death drew near, the Army, beating its deeply resonant chest-like drums with sticks resembling arms, cried aloud by way of the clarion’s shrill blast.[22]
28.  Through the incessant flapping of their ears, the army’s elephants, maddened with rut, seemed to announce the fickleness of Royal Glory, who was dwelling in the vicinity of their tusks.[23] 
29.  The repeatedly flapping, outstretched ears of elephants assumed the role of brand-new palmyra fans for Death, who was exhausted by the exertion of his hurried arrival.
30.  Through their neighing noises, stemming from a sense of the approaching danger, the horses that were let loose in the celestial path seemed to readily betray their terrorizing fear of Yama’s buffalo mount not far away.[24]
31.  The mouths of the horses were bathed in the lustre of their long, golden bridles as if kissed by a swelling surge of life’s energy that was about to depart in the near future.[25]
32.  Carrying portable lamps to lead Death from the front, or so it seemed, through the fiery flames blazing forth from their mouths, female jackals portended evil by howling even in the daytime .[26]
33.  Spreading their dark wings wide, owls covered the sky and shut off all sunlight like they were a row of large parasols in Death’s battalion.
34.  Marching at that moment, the army of the self-indulgent Asuras appeared like Mt. Vindhya’s elephant herd – resounding with the long-drawn cry of flittering ravens/distinguished by she-elephants with large, splendid frontal globes.[27]
35.  Resembling the emerald bells strung to the girdle of the ferocious, dancing Goddess of death, circles of cuckoos shrieked nonstop.[28] 
36.  Thus did flocks of crows and owls cry shrilly over the Asura army that even the blaring trumpet calls, pervading the celestial vault, could scarcely be made out.[29] 
37.  On the surface of the sky, which resembled a plaque, confused rows of ravens appeared like series of letters proclaiming the decree of Death as he rose to victory.
38.  It seemed as if the Asuras, fitted with dark armours that were marked with ornamental golden wheels, were donning the sky, dotted with several orbs of the fierce-rayed sun, to announce their misfortune.[30]
39.  Thanks to their fearsome bows that were bent into a circle, it seemed as if the paramours of the pretty-eyed Asura damsels were fetching so many bangles as gifts for Yama’s womenfolk. 
40.  In the Asura army that resembled Death’s pleasure pond by its vastness, swords tossed about dark hide-shields like mossy creepers about lotus leaves.[31] 
41.  Though the Asuras - rich repositories of evil actions - were endowed with bodies befitting consignment to the Asipatra hell/carried swords on their persons, they never faced the Raurava hell/yelled at the foe continuously![32]
42.  Displaying wave after wave of odd mannerisms with their bodies that were covered in slush-like black armours, they marched forth, keen to take a plunge in the shimmering edges, akin to streams, of enemy swords arranged in circular arrays.[33] 
43.  Due to its iron-black lustre, the marching Asura army, interspersed with bloodshot eyes, put on the semblance of a Hasantika basket pregnant with the fire of anger.[34]
44.  As the Puras marched towards Death’s Capital, the Asuras in the vanguard, with many rows of quivers strapped to their backs, looked like porters carrying the baggage of (their own) wicked actions.
45.  The Asuras, whose bows were overspread with the rays of their multihued gem armlets, seemed to be carrying different kinds of weapons so as to anxiously conceal their identity as Diti’s sons.[35]
46.  Due to the glistening powder rained down by the gems of their armlets, which broke asunder when they jostled against one another, the Asuras seemed to conjure up a spectacle of glow worms to mark the advent of the army’s dust clouds.[36] 
47.  As the dust that was shaken up by the army brought a gush of tears to their eyes, the Asuras seemed to be crying spontaneously and without control at each and every step in anticipation of their race’s utter ruin, to be wrought soon by Death’s impending assault. 
48.  Thanks to the Asuras, whose eyes were glowing red due to their association with an ever-deepening rage, the directions appeared to be bathed in the vermillion powder that was strewn around in large quantities by Yama’s jubilant city.[37] 
49.  Presently, the Asuras’ horses, axles, draught poles, and yokes were thickly smeared with the army’s dust, so it seemed they were simultaneously endowing their own chariots with an earth-like quality for gaining victory over Shiva, who had made the earth his chariot.
50.  As the Asura horde emerged out of its city, a row of crows gathered in the northern direction as if Death had thrown open the iron bolt of his direction (i.e., the South) and cleared the way for its (i.e., the horde’s) entry.[38]
51.  It wailed aloud by way of drumbeats and shed tears through long jets of water ejected from the trunks of elephants; close to death as never before, the Army of the Asuras repeatedly expressed its sorrow in every possible way.
52.  Their heavily languid eyes closing partially and slackened bodies assuming awkward postures in pride, the Asuras seemed to indicate their preparedness for the long-drawn sleep of death, which they would enjoy shortly on a bed of the enemy’s missiles.[39]
53.  “Either we exterminate the army of the Devas in battle or are exterminated by it. Either way, we will reach heaven and make our enemy’s beloved women ours” - thinking repeatedly in this manner, a few Asuras, ripples of lustful desire and martial spirit surging strongly within, rushed out energetically from their abodes. 
54.  Their tips/mouths marked by spattering drops of water/venom, the trunks of elephants whirled around in mid-air like the large, striped serpents in the nooses of Yama’s warrior servants, who were eager for the sport of capturing the Asuras.
55.  As the enemies of the heaven-dwelling gods marched out in the spirit of preparedness to wage a war with the armies of the Lord of the Ganas, whose bow had been strung up, the Cities, apprehending that they may not return back, gave them a quick, nostalgic hug with the outstretched arms of rays radiating from their bejewelled walls.
56.  The saffron designs over their budded breasts washed away by the sweat of trepidation and their ear ornaments slipping down due to the ever-increasing tremors of anxiety, the dark-eyed Danava damsels seemed to already exhibit the signs of an imminent, fast-approaching widowhood on their limbs just as their lovers set out with an intent to fight in the battle.[40]
57.  The Asuras, their mansions resounding with the loud cries of distressed harem ladies, seemed to vomit out of their mouths the enemy’s fiery energy, which they had drunk in previously, through the blood dripping from their lips, bitten by them in extraordinary and unrelentingly intense anger as they continuously watched the army of the Devas enter the Cities without any hesitation.[41] 
58.  As they mutually collided, the armies of the Devas and the Asuras, interspersed with rows of upraised umbrellas standing for balls of foam and resonating with the loud din of drums as with the roar of waves, put on the semblance of  two vast oceans mingling with one another at the time of universal annihilation. 


________________
[1]‘paruṣa’ = ‘ulbaṇa’ (JR), translated here as ‘filled with’.
[2]‘Kālapāśakaraṇim’ = ‘yamapāśasarpāṇāṃ sāmyam’ (‘semblance of the serpents that form Yama’s noose’) (JR)
[3]Sandalwood paste is cold in potency (‘candanaṃ hi śītavīryam’, JR) 
[4]The poet seems to liken the red glow reflected in the sword, which is similar to a serpent’s hood, with the gem found therein.
[5]The lotus-seated Lakshmi is supposed to dwell in the warrior’s sword. Since the Asuras will be killed very soon, she decides to abandon their swords (JR). As she prepares to leave, her lotus-abodes kiss goodbye to the swords. The red glances reflected in the swords resemble kisses.
[6]People announce a dead person’s journey to the other world by beating drums (JR) 
[7]‘Ari’ is a less common word for ‘wheel’. The Asura seemed to be fashioning a new chariot for his own journey to the other world (JR). 
[8]A trail of smoke resembles an iron chain both in its colour and appearance.  
[9]The Asura’s wounds burst open because his limbs were filled with to a burst of new energy, thus causing them to expand (JR).    
[10]According to JR, the dark rays emanating from the sword are compared by Mankha to threads that are used for marking the measuring lines during the construction of Death’s mansion (‘khaḍgaraśmayo yamavāstusūtratvena sambhāvitāḥ’). When architects want to draw or extend a shape or correct the crookedness of a shape, they trace its outline by dropping a thread that is smeared with soot, chalk, etc. (‘śilpinaśca kimapi lekhituṃ varddhayituṃ cālikhyamānasya varddhyamānasya cākāravakrimaparihārāya maṣīkhaṭikādyupaliptasūtrābhighātena rekhāpatanaṃ kurvanti’, Narayana’s commentary on Naiṣadhacarita, 15.34). In this case, one could imagine the dark rays as threads smeared with soot.  
[11]The Sun fears he will not only be swallowed but also digested by Rahu if the latter’s head and trunk reunite.
[12]Since ‘gaṇḍalekhā’ (‘cheek’) and ‘kopapāṭalimā’ (‘redness caused by anger’) are in the feminine and masculine genders respectively, the two can be imagined as standing in the mutual relation of a lady and her lover with the word ‘shared’ (‘samvibhakta’) having the overtone of ‘enjoyed’ (‘kṛtopabhoga’) (JR). 
[13]Asura = Collyrium Mountain; iron armour = dark clouds.
[14]To-be-executed criminals are covered in crimson robes (JR). 
[15]The playful butting of buffaloes (as well as elephants and bulls) against a bank or bund is called ‘vaprakrīḍā’ or ‘taṭāghāta’; it is frequently described in Sanskrit poetry.
[16]The trebling of blackness is because of their naturally black complexion combined with the blackness of iron armours and the glow of their black swords (JR).
[17]That is, the parasols and flywhisks did not serve the purpose of announcing their royal position (which, they would be shortly deprived of), but merely allayed the heat of their anxiety (JR). 
[18]The gem-studded black parasols are akin to coiled-up snakes carrying gems on their hoods (JR). 
[19]Here, the word ‘jajñire’, may either mean ‘(they) became (associated with ripples of ash)’ or ‘(they were) perceived (as associated with ripples of ash’), depending on whether it is derived from the verb root ‘jan’ (in which case ‘jajñire’ is the liṭ-lakāra, third person, plural form in the active voice) or from the verb root ‘jñā’ (in which case ‘jajñire’ is the liṭ-lakāra, third person, plural form in the passive voice).
[20]‘Ghaṭikā’ refers most probably to the pitcher-like knob of an umbrella. Someshvara calls it ‘kalaśa’ in the section titled ‘Chatrabhoga’ of his encyclopaedic work Mānasollāsa, (‘cañcatkāñcanajātena kalaśena virājitam’, 3.17.62)
[21]The whiteness of the parasols and the blare of trumpets stand respectively for the whiteness of laughter and the loud sound accompanying it. JR’s commentary for this verse is not available.  
[22]The Army is here imagined to be a lady who is crying for the imminent death of her Asura lord (JR).
[23]Royal Glory, identified with Goddess Lakshmi, is said to have descended down along the path of elephants’ tusks (JR). JR interprets the word ‘tāla’ in ‘karṇatāla’ (‘flapping of the ears’) also as a musical instrument - a drum, specifically; the flapping of ears is equated, through pun, with the beating of drums to announce the fickleness of Royal Glory.
[24]The buffalo is regarded as a natural enemy of the horse (‘aśvānāṃ mahiṣaiḥ saha śāśvatikvirodhāttrāsavaiśasam, JR; see also 20.20). 
[25]The poet imagines personified life energy as kissing the horses goodbye before taking leave of them. 
[26]‘Female jackals emit flames from their mouth when they howl’ (‘vāśantīnāṃ śivānāṃ mukhādagnijvālā nirgacchantīti vastugatiḥ’, JR). The jackals are imagined as carrying lamps so Death can see the way in the dense darkness created by the dust of the battle (JR).
[27]The word ‘hāstika’ (‘herd of elephants’) is derived from ‘hasti’ by the rule ‘acittahastidhenoṣṭak’ (JR). 
[28]The uncommon, continuous shrieking is an evil omen (JR) 
[29]The Dvandva compound ‘kākaghūkam’, whose elements, ‘kāka’ (‘crow’) and ‘ghūka’ (‘owl’), represent animals that have permanent enmity, takes the singular number according to the rule ‘yeṣāṃ ca virodhaḥ śaśvatikaḥ’ (JR). 
[30]The simultaneous rise of several (specifically, twelve) suns heralds universal destruction (cf. ‘dagdhuṃ viśvaṃ dahanakiraṇairnoditā dvādaśārkāḥ’, Veṇīsaṃhāra, 3.61). The armours and the wheels marked on them stand for the sky and the numerous suns respectively. 
[31]Swords stand for mossy creepers and shields for lotus leaves. 
[32]JR’s commentary for the second half of the verse is not available. ‘Asipattra’ and ‘’Raurava’ are two types of hells – Narakas - among many. ‘Asipatravana’ is a forest whose leaves are blades of swords and which is populated by fierce dogs. People who are left to suffer in this hell are cut to pieces by the swords that fall on them from the trees above when a heavy wind blows across the place. Their limbs are then eaten up by the dogs (‘patrāṇi tatra khaḍgānāṃ phalāni - - - || śvānaśca tatra sabalāḥ - - - vyāghrā iva bhayānakāḥ || - - - teṣāṃ gatānāṃ tatrāsipattrapātī samīraṇaṃ | pravāti tena pātyante teṣāṃ khaḍgānyathopari || - - - sārameyāstataḥ śīghraṃ ghātayanti śarīrataḥ | teṣāmaṅgāni rudatāmanekānyatibhīṣaṇāḥ || asipattravanaṃ tāta mayaitatparikīrtitam ||’ Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa, 12.27-33). Raurava is a Naraka in which people who have committed evil acts are left to suffer in a pit filled with burning embers (‘tataḥ śvabhraḥ sudustaraḥ || tatrāṅgāracayo - - - | - - - tanmadhye pāpakarmāṇaṃ vimuñcanti yamānugāḥ ||, Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa, 10.80-83). The word ‘arauravagraham’ must be split in two ways – ‘arau, rava+graham’ and ‘a+raurava+graham’ – in order to appreciate the apparent contradiction in the verse and resolve it. The contradiction is due to the description of the Asuras as meriting punishment in Asipatra but not in Raurava. 
[33]It is appropriate for those covered in slush to take a plunge in water (JR). 
[34]See footnote under 3.29. 
[35]The colourful bows appeared like different kinds of strange weapons, thus masking the real identity of the Asuras carrying them.
[36]Glow worms are seen in the rainy season (JR). 
[37]Vermillion powder is strewn around in joyous occasions (JR). 
[38]The row of black crows is likened to an iron bolt. Yama, the god of death, presides over the South.
[39]One shuts one’s eyes and assumes awkward postures in pride and drowsiness alike (JR).
[40]Similar in idea to 21.50. 
[41]Vomiting is accompanied by sound (here, the louds cries of womenfolk) (JR). 


#========
Canto23
1. As the two armies clashed with one another, a fierce battle ensued between the wildly excited Deva and Asura warriors, whose intolerance for one another kept growing.
2. Unsheathed sword blades, which mirrored the sun’s orb, looked like the bejewelled, expanded hoods of Death’s serpent noose.[1] 
3. The Asuras, whose arrows were drenched with profusely pouring sweat, foreboding of the evil to come, seemed to wield arrows that were consecrated with Varuna’s divine chant for defeating the fire-arrowed Shiva.[2]
4. Fearing Shiva’s fiery arrow that was blazing before them, the Fortunes of the Cities plunged beforehand, as it were, into the watery sheen of the gods’ swords.[3]
5. By blowing the war trumpets with their breaths, the attendants in the celestial army invited Yama, or so it seemed, with a clarion call to feast on the enemy forces.
6. When Shiva, the Master of the universe, arrived, the bows of both warring groups bowed down. Surprisingly though, the unyieldingly stiff arrows were the ones to get released.[4] 
7. The arrows of the gods, feathers rustling on both sides, whooshed through the sky, dancing, as it were, in joyous intoxication at the prospect of feasting on Asura blood.[5]
8. The tree of battle seemed to continuously put forth an exuberance of fresh sprouts and the Directions appeared to be covered in bristles due to the arrows darting here and there through the air.[6] 
9. The arrows that were directed at one another by the bowmen on both sides became messengers dispatched in advance to facilitate the union of their chests with the budding breasts of divine damsels.[7]
10.  Thus did one soldier latch the mouth of his opponent with an elongated arrow that his vital breaths couldn’t get in once again.[8]
11.  Under the guise of the sparks emanating from them when they were hit by a volley of arrows, the armours of the soldiers seemed to sport tongues stretched out for devouring the lives of enemies.
12.  His chest pierced all of a sudden by the tip of an arrow, a certain dying soldier was momentarily prevented from enjoying the tight embrace of a celestial lady.[9] 
13.  The arrow of an Asura alighted agilely on the face of Ganesha, fooling Shiva’s eyes into believing that his other tusk had sprouted once again.[10]
14.  The elephants in the Asura army temporarily put up with the elephant-headed God’s rut but ran helter-skelter, their confidence shattered, on seeing his lion mount.[11] 
15.  A wildly dancing battle axe shone in the hand of Ganesha, the remover of obstacles, who was smeared with vermillion to commemorate, as it were, the festive occasion of war.[12]
16.  Ganesha granted the bowmen before him a hurdle-free entry into Death’s metropolis when they worshipped him with a shower of arrows, standing for flowers, and smeared him (with blood).[13]
17.  The Asura warriors, who exuded plentiful, hitherto-unseen pride/ichor and were thronged by crows/endowed with bulky frontal globes overhead, seemed intent on challenging the elephant-faced Ganesha.[14]
18.  Surprisingly, Bhrngiriti’s body needed no armour since the enemy’s sharp arrows fell off after hitting his unrelentingly hard and protruding bones.[15]
19.  Through his adeptness in employing an unbridled array of deadly missiles, Tandu reduced the enemy’s soldiers to headless trunks and orchestrated their uninterrupted Tandava dance.[16] 
20.  By striking the frontal globes of elephants with his lively hands, did Nandi play the drum before Shiva as the latter danced spiritedly on the battlefield’s playhouse?[17]
21.  Skilfully scattering away all of the enemy’s arrows in different directions, Kumara seemed to arise once again from the forest of reeds as his body emerged into view.[18]
22.  The head of an elephant, whose body was cut off, bounced up and landed on a headless trunk in the Asura army, thus creating the illusion of a second Ganesha with its wobbling movements.
23.  Ganesha effortlessly accomplished the continuous blowing of his victory conch since he wore for his ear ornaments conches that were made sequentially noisy by the gush of wind resulting from the flapping of his ears.[19]
24.  Kumara’s peacock emblem, reflected in his sword, which was streaked with blood the colour of a lightning flash, seemed to eagerly embrace it by mistaking it for a fresh cloud.[20] 
25.  As soon as a slender Sword, characterized by the purity of its metal/horripilation, closely clasped the neck of a warrior, the latter, tormented by matchless arrows/the odd-arrowed Kama, was thoroughly soaked in blood/overcome with intense love.[21]
26.  A certain Asura warrior, having ascended to heaven after his death, made love to the doe-eyed divine damsels, arousing redoubled jealousy in the onlooker gods.[22]
27.  Even those Asuras, who, having given up their lives facing their enemies in war had attained godhood, were looked at with steadily irate glances by their own kith and kin (i.e., by other Asuras).[23]
28.  Richly endowed with weapons/flames that were reddened by blood/blood-red in colour, the fire-born Kumara, whose fiery form blazed brightly due to its association with battle/fuelwood, attained similitude with his source (i.e., fire).[24]
29.  The elephants appeared like pawns as Death grabbed the noose/dice and engaged in a game of gambling to secure the wager, namely, the life of the Asuras.
30.  His face mirrored by a multitude of swords in every direction, a certain Asura seemed to attain Ravana-hood so as to make Shiva’s forces tremble in fear.[25]
31.  Ganesha’s deftly flapping ears bore the brunt of arrows and served the purpose of shields protecting his face. [26]
32.  The mauling impact of the wrathful Death’s row of fangs was rendered superfluous on the bodies of the Asuras that were already pulverized by the onslaught of Ganesha’s sharp tusk.
33.  Spit out, as it were, from the mouth of Death, whose palate was shattered by an array of sharp arrows sticking out from his limbs, a certain Asura was restored back to life in spite of being wounded.[27]
34.  Yet another Asura’s body was already dripping with saffron-tinged sweat, wherefore one could not readily notice the blood gushing forth from it when the enemy’s arrows struck him.
35.  Lady Victory went back and forth between the armies of the Devas and the Asuras as if she were an envoy trying to somehow negotiate a truce between them.
36.  The blood oozing from warriors became the vermillion decoration of the battle, standing for an elephant; a shower of plentiful arrows resembled the jet of water emitted from its trunk and a row of dark swords, its streaming ichor.
37.  The fire-laden missiles discharged by the celestial warriors were not at all made out because their smoke was lost in the radiant lustre of dark swords and their flaming tongues were scarcely distinguishable from streams of blood.
38.  The fire emanating from the missiles, which were presently employed by the gods, boiled the blood and roasted the flesh (of the enemies) simultaneously, thus functioning as the kitchen fire of overjoyed goblins, demons, and female fiends.[28] 
39.  When the class of weapons, whose power is made manifest by gods such as Varuna, Agni, Indra, Brahma, Vishnu, and so on, was employed by those very gods, how could the possibility of victory be a matter of doubt?[29]
40.  Though overcome with intense passion, a celestial damsel rejected one certain Asura, whose life breaths were departing after a spirited fight in the ensuing battle, because he was reduced to a headless trunk and she realized that the substrata of her hugging and kissing were not the same.[30] 
41.  How strange! The more a warrior’s body appeared disgusting due to the blood and marrow oozing from it on account of the enemy’s weapons, the more he aroused love in the heart of heavenly damsels.[31]
42.  His face made menacing by sharp, bared fangs, another Asura penetrated the solar orb to reach the heroic realm, which he had earned by bravely sacrificing his life in the battle, wherefore the Sun was somewhat aghast, mistaking him for Rahu, who had turned wild after his torso was joined back.[32]
43.  Bristling with spears sticking out in large numbers from its each and every limb, one headless trunk seemed to stretch out hundreds of arms as it danced the joyful dance of war.[33]
44.  The love play of another warrior, who had lost his life in war, had advanced only as far as kissing a heavenly damsel when, having sipped in the ample ambrosia streaming forth from her lips, he instantly came back to life once again.
45.  Their garments from hides; their overflowing wine from blood; their fancy appetizers from flesh; and the adornments for the breasts of their womenfolk from the pearls sprouting in the temples; in this way, there was nothing the night-wandering ghouls did not procure in the joyous occasion of the war from the elephants that were pierced by a volley of arrows, which the Devas and the Asuras released at one another.[34]
46.  The frontal globes of the elephants, which dotted the directions with an explosion of pearls that were exposed to plain view by the shattering impact of sharply piercing arrows, put on the appearance of rice-cooking vessels in Death’s kitchen as their lids were being opened.[35]
47.  In the battle’s nocturnal hour, which was possessed of the preeminent splendour resulting from a multitude of swords and attained ample glory by harbouring elephants in rut/enriched by thickly spreading darkness from the start and proudly flaunted its stars, all the warriors beheld victory’s primeval secret with the lamp of their fiery prowess.[36] 
48.  In this way, a fearsome and singularly spirited battle ensued between the Devas and the Asuras, the glow of whose faces turned completely red under the unchallenged sway of intolerable anger towards one another. It was a battle in which ferocious heads, chopped off by series of arrows, rolled to the ground as if they were large fruits dropping down from the coconut trees in Death’s pleasure garden.
49.  As the army of Shiva, whose crest is adorned with the baby moon, took pride on being boldly embraced by Lady Victory several times over, the triad of Cities came together, united in the warring spirit that grew stronger with every display of seething rage.[37]
50.  Their limbs dripping with swathes of angry sweat, the Asuras, whose bolt-like arms had stopped Lady Fortune from visiting their enemy’s mansions, seemed to have besmeared themselves with plentiful oil as if, incapable of suffering long-drawn pain, they wished to be burnt instantly in the flames of Shiva’s fire-missile.[38]
51.  Their frowns turned dark, lips trembled, and hearts grew hot in anger, due, as if, to the impending disaster: the discharge of Shiva’s arrow, fashioned from the black-hued Vishnu, the cool-rayed moon, and the flame-bannered fire - all come together in mutual companionship.[39]
52.  The savage Asuras, who, in their swelling, unstoppable arrogance, desired to exterminate even the moon-crested Lord, covered the bodies of the celestial beings with a shower of strategic missiles. Surprisingly though, what disappeared from sight was the manifold beauty of their women’s faces, whose adornment of thick saffron paste melted away.[40]
53.  The battleground resembled a lake with hands, hacked by sharp weapons, standing for lotuses; white parasols, their shafts broken, sparkling like copious foam; black swords putting on the appearance of moss tendrils; and the spinning movements of headless trunks, dancing wildly, imitating swirling whirlpools. Ruffling this lake, the Asuras roared like elephants in rut.[41]
54.  Scattered with multitudes of broken swords lying amidst streams of blood, the battlefield, which caused unusual exhilaration/drunkenness in the warriors, looked like the goblet of Death, filled to the brim with wine and dressed with densely packed petals of blue lilies.[42]
55.  The two armies that took part in the battle between the Devas and the Asuras evoked wonder for the greater part: Though they did not hold any wine within, they poured down wine in copious amounts/they comprised of valiant warriors and infused the Devas with fervour; though their fluttering garments were being readily snatched away everywhere, they were still holding on to the hem of their garments/their zeal for war was evident everywhere in drumbeats and they took to the skies; and though they had aged, they did not attain menopause/they kept expanding and raised up dust without a break.[43] 
56.  Thickly embraced by the glow of the sparks emanating from Agni’s fiery missile, Varuna’s irrepressible rain-bearing missile expanded to envelop the entire battlefield. But it was soon concealed by streams of blood gushing forth from wounds caused by the doubly ghastly arrows that the two armies, formidable in their obedience to wild rage, discharged at each other.[44]
________________
[1]The reflection of the sun’s orb stands for the gem adorning the serpent’s hood that is the sword blade. JR suggests ‘kālapannaga’ (‘black cobra’) as an alternative reading for ‘pāśapannaga’ (‘serpent noose’).
[2]Since warriors are expected to overcome exertion (śrama), it is an evil omen if they are drenched in profuse sweat (‘śramajala’, literally ‘the water of exertion’). Since Varuna is the lord of waters and water puts out fire, a weapon consecrated with his chant might help the Asuras counter Shiva’s fire-laden missile (JR).  
[3]The purport is that the cities of the Asuras were deprived of their fortune; one may jump into water if overcome by fear (JR)
[4]When a master arrives, people bow down to him in respect. The master, though, might not bestow ‘śaktipāta’ (‘divine grace’) on them but, surprisingly, on someone who doesn’t bow down before him. The word ‘muktatā’ (‘release’) is used in the dual senses of ‘release from the bow’ and ‘release from the cycle of birth and death’.   
[5]Intoxication might be accompanied by dancing; the feathers on either sides of the arrows stand for arms (JR).
[6]Since the word ‘dik’ (‘direction’) is in the feminine gender, it makes sense to describe to directions, likened to women, as covered in horripilation (JR).  
[7]Since the arrows piercing the chests of warriors will kill them and since those killed in battle are believed to reach heaven and enjoy the company of celestial damsels, the poet likens them to messengers; the simple purport of the verse is that no one on either side of the warring factions ran away in fear (JR).
[8]A strong latch prevents the entry of even the wind; the expression ‘his vital breaths couldn’t get in once again’ is a roundabout way of saying ‘he died’ (JR).  
[9]The arrow sticking out from the warrior’s chest came in the way of a free embrace (JR).  
[10]‘Īśacakṣuṣām’ is a poetically significant usage; since Ganesha fooled even the lordly Shiva’s (‘īṣasya’) many eyes (‘cakṣuṣām’) into believing that his another tusk had sprouted once again (JR), it is evident that he would have easily fooled others, who are not lords and who possess only two eyes, too.
[11]A rather unusual description of Ganesha riding a lion (One of the names of Ganesha given in the Ganeśasahasranāma, verse 12, is ‘siṃhavāhana’, with the commentary of Bhaskararaya mentioning that the lion is also the vehicle of Ganesha just as the mouse and peacock are – ‘mayūramūṣakau yadvattathā siṃho’pi vāhanam’; the Asuras ran helter-skelter in fear because they saw an elephant riding a lion, while in normal case it is known that lions kill elephants (JR). 
[12]Festivities are accompanied by dance (here, of the battle axe) and smearing of vermillion (JR).  
[13]Ganesha removes the hurdles of those who worship him. 
[14]The idea is that the Asuras attained a form that was similar to Ganesha’s so they could challenge him.
[15]Bhrngiriti (also known as Bhrngi) lost all flesh and was reduced to bones as a result of disrespecting Parvati (JR) by positing a false dichotomy between Shiva and her (‘bhedabuddhyā bravīṣi me | - - - bhṛṅgiṇoktaṃ tiraskṛtya tadā śāpaṃ dadau satī | nirmāṃso bhava re manda re bhṛṅgin - - - || (skanda Purāṇa, māheśvarakhaṇḍa, kedārakhaṇḍa, 34.19-21)
[16]The Tāṇḍava dance owes its name to Tandu, who taught it first (‘taṇḍunā proktaṃ tāṇḍavam’, Kshirasvami’s , quotation in Vācaspatya).
[17]Nandi plays the drum during Shiva’s dance. 
[18]According to Puranic lore, Skanda was born from a forest of reeds (śara), whereby he is also called ‘Śarajanmā’ (‘etasminnantare devyaḥ kṛttikāḥ ṣaṭsutejasaH | dadṛśuḥ svecchayā yantyo bālaṃ śaravaṇe sthitam || - - - yatra skandaḥ sthito’bhavat |, Vāmana Purāṇa, 57.22,23)
[19]Conches are blown to communicate victory (JR). 
[20]The black sword stands for fresh(dark) cloud and the blood streaking it, for a lightning flash 
[21]JR explains ‘pulaka’ as ‘a special feature of a sword’ (‘guṇaviśeṣa’). ‘Pulaka’ refers to the purity/sheen/excellence of a metal (‘pulakastu sārapratipādano varṇātiśayaḥ, sa ca lohe’pyasti, yata eva bruvanti – ‘ramaṇīyo’sya khaḍgasya pulaka utthita’, - - - apara āha kaṇagapulagaśabdaḥ śreṣṭhavācī’, Avacūri commentary on the word ‘kanagapulaga’ in Bhagavatīsūtra, 1.3). ‘Asilekhā’ (‘slender sword’), which is in the feminine gender, is likened to a maiden hugging her lover’s neck.
[22]The jealousy takes the form of this thought: “How is it that this Asura, whom we defeated by killing, enjoys the company of our women by taking our form?” (JR).
[23]The kith and kin of such Asuras think thus: “How did they attain the status of Devas in spite of being our relatives?” (JR).
[24]Skanda is regarded as the son of the Fire God, whence his name ‘Agnibhūḥ’ 
[25]The ten-headed Asura Ravana had shaken Mt. Kailasa in the past and made the Gaṇas tremble in fear (See footnote under 4.21).
[26]The main purpose of a shield is to protect the face against weapons (JR). 
[27]The poet fancies that the Asura was restored back to life because Death spit him out from his mouth, which, in turn, was because his palate was shattered by the sharp arrows sticking out from the former’s limbs. 
[28]Read ‘prayuyuje’strahutāśano’ in the place of ‘prayuyuje suhutāśano’
[29]How could victory elude the gods who employed weapons that they themselves preside over? The word ‘daivata’ is not commonly employed in the masculine gender (JR) as has been done in this verse.
[30]The substratum of kissing and hugging are the head (i.e., mouth) and the trunk respectively.
[31]Read ‘citraṃ’ for ‘cittam’. The strangeness is because of the coming together of two opposing emotions, namely, disgust and love (JR), i.e., the substratum of disgust is also the substratum of love.  
[32]Warriors dying in war (as well as Yogis) are said to penetrate the sun’s orb (‘dvāvimau puruṣau loke sūryamaṇḍalabhedinau | parivrāḍyogayuktaśca raṇe cābhimukho hataḥ ||, Śārṅgadharapaddhati, 80.219); the Asura here is mistaken by the Sun for Rahu because of his sharp, bared fangs (JR).
[33]Joy is often expressed through dancing (JR). 
[34]Cf. ‘aho prādoṣikaḥ pramodaḥ piśācāṅganānām – ‘antraiḥ kalpitamaṅgalapratisarāḥ - - - ‘ (Mālatīmādhava, 5.18)
[35]The frontal globes of the elephants and the pearls scattering from them are compared respectively to cooking vessels and morsels of rice.
[36]The expressions ‘tamasiparikareṇa’ and ‘pronmadebhāśrayeṇa’ must be split as ‘tam, asi+parikareṇa’/‘tamasi, parikareṇa’ and ‘pronmada+ibha+āśrayeṇa’/‘pronmade, bha+āśrayeṇa’ in connection with the contextual (war-related) and non-contextual (night-related) meanings respectively.
[37]The three cities, that never came together due to fear of death, did so in anger (JR), i.e., they lost their ability to discern good from bad in their anger.
[38]The arms of the Asuras acted as bolts that hitherto prevented the entry of Lakshmi into the mansions of the Devas.
[39]The darkness of frown, trembling of lips, and heating up of hearts are related respectively to the presence of the black-hued Vishnu, the cool-rayed moon, and fire in Shiva’s arrow (JR).  
[40]The cause for surprise is the fact that one thing (i.e., the bodies of the Devas) was covered but another thing (beauty of the Asura women’s faces) was lost to view (JR).
[41]JR gives ‘vartita’ (‘brought to existence’) as an alternative reading for ‘nartita’ (‘swirling’, literally ‘dancing’), probably because the sense of ‘nartita’ is already provided by the word ‘nṛtyat’ in the preceding compound ‘līlānṛtyatkabandhabhramarakaracanaiḥ’. 
[42]The battlefield, blood, and broken swords are likened to goblet, wine and blue lily petals respectively (JR).
[43]Each of the first three lines of the verse presents an apparent contradiction based on pun. The word ‘vismayāya’ is a pointer in that direction: one of the meanings of the punned words presents a contradiction that can be resolved by resorting to the other meaning. The first line has been interpreted differently by JR. He construes the word ‘vīrasthitiḥ’ in the compound ‘antaḥsamprāptavīrasthitiḥ’ as ‘the state of birds flying away’ (‘vīnāṃ pakṣiṇām īrasthitiḥ palāyanam’); likewise, he interprets the compound word ‘vivṛtodrekasekā’ as ‘bustling with birds that crowd around’ (‘vibhiḥ pakśibhirvṛta udreka utseko yasyām). The contradiction is in saying that the dyad of armies (‘sainyadvayī) was characterized by birds flying away but was also bustling with birds. JR reinterprets the same two words in a second, different way, too. In this second interpretation, the word ‘vīrasthiti’ is explained as ‘an earthless state’ (‘vigatā irā bhūmiryasyāḥ sā sthitiḥ). This would make the meaning of ‘antaḥsamprāptavīrasthitiḥ’ as ‘endowed internally with an earthless state’. JR then explains ‘vivṛtodrekasekā’ as ‘drenched excessively’ (‘vivṛta udrekeṇātyarthaṃ seko yayā sā’). The contradiction, if we accept this interpretation, lies in describing the dyad of armies as drenched in spite of being earthless, since being drenched is a quality of the earth. Whichever of the two interpretations we take, the contradictions that arise can be resolved by resorting to the alternate meaning of the punned words. This other meaning is as follows: ‘The dyad of armies comprised of valiant warriors and infused the Devas with fervour’. It can be noted that JR does not consider the word ‘surāṇāṃ’ within the ambit of punned words. Taking my cue from JR’s second interpretation of ‘vīrasthiti’ as ‘vigatā irā bhūmiryasyāḥ sā sthitiḥ but choosing to explain ‘irā’ as ‘wine’ (‘surā’, as mentioned in ‘irā bhūvāksurāpsu syāt, Amarakoṣa, 3.3.176) instead of ‘earth’, I have rendered ‘antaḥsamprāptavīrasthitiḥ’ as ‘they (i.e., the two armies) did not hold any wine within’, a paraphrase of  the literal translation ‘they were endowed internally with a wineless state’. In keeping with this new understanding of one of the punned words in the first line, I have translated the punned phrase ‘vivṛtodrekasekā surāṇāṃ’ as ‘they poured down wine in copious amounts’, a restatement of  ‘they exhibited a copious pouring down of wine’. It can be seen that I have included the word ‘surāṇām’ within the ambit of pun. In one case, ‘surāṇām’ is the genitive plural of the feminine word ‘surā’ and in the other case, of the masculine word ‘sura’. There is a contradiction in describing the dyad of armies as being devoid of wine yet overflowing with it. The contradiction can be resolved in the same way as described above.  
[44]The showers raining down from Varuna’s missile were reddened by the glow of Agni’s missile and were therefore indistinguishable from streams of blood pouring forth from the wounds of the warriors (JR). 


#========
Canto24


1. As the three furious sons of Diti drew near, Lady Battle regained her youth once more; she cast the scabbards, standing for grey hair, far aside and sported dark tresses through the radiant glow of the swords that were pulled out.[1] 
2. Thus did Indra’s women repeatedly throng the battlefield in their desire to choose one hero after another that the confused bowmen, afraid of committing femicide, found no way of discharging arrows at one another.[2] 
3. The battle caused trouble to the eyes, the skin, the nose, the ears, and the tongue through its dust, the missiles that were being hurled continuously, the heady odour emanating from the ichor of elephants, the blare of horns, and the mutually directed angry curses respectively. Still it was a feast to the valiant soldiers.[3]
4. The battlefield instantly transformed into Death’s pleasure mansion with blood for its vermillion plaster; the lotus-faces of warriors, tossed up by hundreds of arrows, for its endlessly multiplying ornamentation; and the closely-set barrage of missiles that concealed the skies for its lofty canopy.
5. The dazzling lustre of swords engulfed the interspaces of the directions thoroughly like some dense, dreaded darkness, only to be overpowered by the splendour of the celestial womenfolk’s moon-like faces as they greedily gathered around to find an ever new partner.
6. Having again and again beheld the Tripuras, who were accompanied by other Asuras and displayed utmost hatred on account of occupying one and the same place, the gods came together once more and repeatedly cast their pleading glances on the wrathful Shiva, their heads bent in devotional servitude.[4]
7. And then, drawing his curved bow, Shiva – physician par excellence to the Daitya-stricken triple world – fixed on it a fire-laden missile for his enemies, a missile that offered stiff competition to his third eye, which proudly exhibited its arched, angrily knit, and wildly dancing brow.[5]
8. Akin to the spreading lustre of the dark-hued Vishnu, who transformed even into an arrow due to his hatred for the enemies, the thick smoke that was spewed by the feisty fire fastened to the missile (of Shiva) set the stage for the pretty-eyed Asura maidens to shed tears.[6]
9. Vishnu, the wielder of the Sharnga bow, had caused much awe in the minds of the celestials by killing the kith and kin of Bana /cutting off the feathers attached to an arrow though he was the (enemy’s) target in war. But now, he himself transformed into the arrow of Shiva, Master of the triple world, so as to burn down his own body and the Fortune of the Puras along with it.[7] 
10.  And Vishnu, whose foot, raised skyward like a rod, had created the impression of a perfect bolt to prevent Lakshmi from entering the palaces of Bali, acquired adeptness in pervading the universe once more when Shiva, Tripura’s foe, made him his arrow and discharged him far away.[8]
11.  Innumerable missiles/flames emanated from even a single missile that Shiva released in the sky with wind’s speed! Engulfing every limb of the Puras, they cleverly mimicked a multitude of Death’s restless tongues. 
12.  Every Flame spread far and wide, leaving the vast sky behind/ completely took off her pretty garment and embraced the Asura lords tremblingly, throwing them into a daze/enthralling them with her lovemaking; every hot Flame, which was associated with the matchless arrow (of Shiva)/afflicted by the odd-arrowed Kama and seemed to turn the (onlooker’s) eyes red/cast glances that were infused with desire.[9]
13.  Desirous of making the Daitya hordes its first morsel, the fire in the tip of Shiva’s arrow performed a preliminary Pranahuti ritual with the copious tears of their pretty women and then stretched out its flaming tongues on all sides to consume the entire creation with audacity.[10]
14.  Ready to undertake the spirited enterprise of exterminating the Puras, the swaying columns of flames, which proceeded from the fire of Shiva’s missile to engulf space and cause clamour in its every direction, appeared like so many arms of the universe’s Fortune Goddess as she danced madly in the joyous expectation of a heroic exploit hitherto unseen.[11]
15.  As the drama called “The sport of cosmic calamity”, which was richly laden with emotion of each and every kind, came to a close, its cast of Asura actors instantly disappeared behind the inescapably vast curtain of interlacing flames emitted by the swift arrow’s fiery inferno. [12]
16.  The advancing flames of Shiva’s arrow-borne fire, which was agitated by a wall of smoke and interspersed with showering sparks, went unrecognized for the most part on the Asura chieftains’ limbs that were adorned with sapphire- and ruby-studded fanciful gold ornaments.[13]
17.  What more need we say about the contortions exhibited by the fearsome and ferocious bodies of the Asura folks - thorns of the world - than that even the arrow’s fire, its web of flames spinning with indomitable speed, seemed to tremble before them in fear?
18.  Rendering useless the paraphernalia of protective gems, chants, and herbs, which had already been kept ready, the advancing fire of the Triple-eyed God’s arrow appeared to let out a hideous laugh through the crackling noise of bones as it burnt down the Asuras’ limbs one after the other.[14]
19.  Furnished with a rich supply of oily fat/Overcome with deep affection, the Fire of Shiva’s arrow hugged each and every limb of the Asuras tightly in a feeling a brotherhood, or so it seemed, for, like it, they too caused agony/heat to one and all when they were aroused by war/kindled with fuelwood and their banner too, like its (i.e., smoke), caused the world to shed tears incessantly as it unfurled in the sky.[15]
20.  Coils of smoke, which were coughed up by the flames of the fire that was fastened ingeniously to Shiva’s arrow, pervaded the directions and concealed the sky’s surface at first. And then, like piled-up stacks of heavy iron fetters released from the persons of captive celestial women, they brought tears to the eyes of pretty-eyed Asura damsels.[16] 
21.  As the army’s dusty darkness pervaded the sky thoroughly and the host of sky-farers/celestial bodies shone forth everywhere, the dazzling radiance of the Asuras, who flaunted their heroic nature/sunness, disappeared all of a sudden in the fiery blaze even as the splendour of their swords/orbs slipped away.[17]
22.  The Danavas were accustomed to heat and cold alike, thanks to the breeze of their chowries, which withered away by coming in contact with the tepid sighs of captive celestial maidens. And yet, even in the final hours, their each and every limb was pervaded by intense heat/valour when the fire of Shiva’s missile approached them.[18]
23.  The Fortune Goddess of universal sovereignty abandoned the Asuras’ physical frames, which were heated up by the fire fastened to the tip of Shiva’s missile, and readily embraced the limbs of Indra once more, (limbs) that were drenched continuously in cool streams of joyous tears. 
24.  Engulfing the earth on all sides with their (monstrous) bodies, which were reduced to ashes rippling into the firmament, and  interlaced with layers of dancing flames, the Asuras reminded Shiva of the ranges of the Silvery Mountain, its slopes resplendent with luminous herbs of every kind.[19]
25.  On the battleground’s sacred pedestal, the three Asura chieftains, who were set ablaze, each separately, by the sharp shaft’s piercing radiance, played the part of the (three) Fires before Parvati’s hide-clad Lord as he performed the Yajna of eliminating evil from the triple world.[20]  
26.  Oozing streams of ichor, as it were, through its spiralling columns of smoke and sending a jet of sparks far into the directions, the missile’s fire, whose advancing tip was as red as vermillion/face was reddened with vermillion, ravaged the lotus pond of Tripura’s glory like a tusker . 
27.  The long dusty trails of the Triple City’s scattered pile of ashes, which were as white as Sinduvara blossoms, remained suspended in the sky, standing for the broad chest of the blue-bodied Vishnu, where they mimicked the majesty of a newly donned sacred thread.[21]
28.  The arrow’s fire mimicked, in stages, the very appearance of Lord Shiva: It laughed boisterously by way of the white ash; flaunted columns of smoke that looked like black serpents; exhibited the Kalakuta poison masquerading as a thick wall of soot; and glowed with a forehead eye through the circle of flames fixed above.[22]
29.  Though they had been ripened by the boundless heat of valour, the bulky bodies of the Asuras proved difficult to digest for the fire, despite a kindling of its radiance/appetite. It therefore devoured them bit by bit, releasing deep, doubly sour burps of dark smoke at every instant.[23]  
30.  Akin to an exuberance of new-blown Tagara flowers, the heap of ashes, tossed about by wildly blowing winds from the limbs of the Asuras, hung like a play of joyous laughter over the faces of the Direction Maidens, who were brimming with excitement at the end of the crisis that had befallen the three worlds. 
31.  Scattered in all directions by the swift wind, the ashen dust rising from the bodies of the Asura Lords put on the semblance of sacred rice grains strewn around by Shiva, the Master of the three worlds, to allay the fear caused earlier by all kinds of universal calamities that followed one another in waves.[24]
32.  Dispersed in every direction by the free movement of gusty whirlwinds, the gigantic pile of ashen dust from the Asuras’ limbs mimicked a cluster of foamy blobs in the sky’s oceanic expanse and took on the appearance of decorative designs over the bodies of celestial elephants. 
33.  When Shiva’s arrow had thus successfully accomplished the purpose of the universe by defeating the Asuras, the gods danced over and over again with abandon as though because they were deeply drunk on the wine of ecstasy.[25]
34.  Thereafter, shaking off the noisy iron chains bound to their legs, (chains) that appeared like swarms of bees greedily pursuing the scent of Goddess Shri’s lotus abode as she was expelled (from the houses of Asuras), the captive celestial women emerged out from the houses of the Asura chieftains, taking unhurried, leisurely steps owing to the expansion of their joy.[26]
35.  No sooner did Shiva give command by moving his creeper-like eyebrow than the celestial beings, brimming with pride over the accomplishment of their mission, discarded each and every disguise, which they had donned to help the Lord annihilate the Asuras, and once again assumed forms that were appropriate to themselves.[27]
36.  Their limbs lighted up by plentiful flames, the Asura hordes, tossed into the western ocean by Shiva’s arrow, reminded one and all of mountain ranges, engulfed by forest fires and thrown into confusion by the fear of Indra’s weapon hitting them.[28]
37.  How strange! Even as they plunged into the ocean’s waters, the three suns/Asura heroes, who had caused much heat/suffering in the triple world with their unbearable orbs/swords, heralded the appearance of a pristine pure light that readily brightened up the directions/instilled hope and led to a luxuriant blossoming of lotuses/prosperity everywhere with its glow.[29]
38.  Shiva, the Universal Master who dons the role of the triple world’s physician, then withdrew into himself that terrific form of his. Indeed, noble men, known for their inherently pleasing demeanour, go through an artificial transformation but for a moment so they can punish the wicked. 
39.  Placing Shiva in its midst with devotional fervour, the celestial army, whose lively limbs were adorned with a generous crop of goosebumps, proceeded thereafter to heaven. And from there, it started off once again for specific destinations.
40.  When heaven’s Lady Fortune returned, seemingly exhausted by her ordeal with the unyieldingly haughty Tripuaras, who trembled in fear as the net of poignant flames issuing forth from the Angry Lord’s arrow proceeded to swallow them, all the chief gods crowded together, blocking the celestial expanse, and cooled her with streams of ichor rained down by their respective elephants.[30]
41.  Indra exhibited a joyous countenance, suffused with redness like a fresh lotus in full bloom, as if his wife, kissing him vehemently in the intense  yearning of a long-drawn separation, had stamped his face with the glow of her Bimba-lips.[31]
42.  And so, when the Creator’s lotus-seat was filled with sweet aroma as before and droplets of ichor trickled down Ganesha’s face once again, the minds of bumblebees – panegyrists of the creepers growing in the celestial garden – wavered in indecision by weighing one fragrance against another.[32] 
43.  With the beaming rays of its bejewelled slopes, the mountain that is the sportive abode of the Blessed Lord Shiva seemed to readily embrace the Celestial Army approaching it after annihilating the Asuras, heralding happiness to the three worlds, and earning enormous fame.[33] 
44.  Blessing his assembly with his graceful presence, Lord Shrikantha, his limbs covered in bristles as he relished the draught of praise offered to him by innumerable heavenly bards, cast cordial glances at the gods - the Makara-like gems at the edges of whose crowns, bent low in supplication, rubbed against his footstool - and took leave of them.[34]
________________
[1]The swords are compared to tresses because of the black colour and elongated shape that are common to both. The battle stands for a maiden who casts aside her grey hair, resulting from the sorrow of lovelornness, and sports dark tresses after reuniting with her lover (JR).  
[2]JR seems to have consulted a reading that has ‘vīpsayā vā’ in the place of ‘vīpsayā tā’ since he comments on the meaning of ‘vā’ in this alternate reading and explains that ‘vā’ has been used in the sense of ‘iva’ (‘vāśabda ivārthaḥ’). However, ‘vīpsayā tā’ is a poetically better choice because the ‘yā tā’ part of this reading and the ‘yātā’ that immediately follows (in the second line) together serve the purpose of Yamakālaṅkāra – a figure of sound in which a string of syllables (‘yā’ and ‘tā’, in this case) repeat with change in meaning. JR explains ‘bhrūṇahatyā’ (‘feticide’) as ‘strīvadha’ (‘femicide’). 
[3]The battle affected all the five sense organs negatively (JR). 
[4]The Asuras, because of their excess anger, forgot that coming together would prove fatal to them; on the other hand, coming together also intensified their hatred for the gods (JR).
[5]The fire-laden third eye is likened to the fire-laden missile and the eyebrow to the bow. The use of dative case in ‘arātibhyaḥ’ is according to the rule ‘kriyayā coddeśye’ (JR) (see also 20.1)
[6]Mankha compares the thick smoke emitted by Shiva’s fiery arrow to the dark glow of Vishnu, who had transformed into that arrow. The smoke emitted by Shiva’s arrow and the dark glow of Vishnu’s body both make the Asura women shed tears, the former, because it irritates the eyes, and the latter, because Vishnu is renowned for killing the Asuras and bringing widowhood to their women.
[7]He, who became the target and cut of the feathers of an arrow, himself became an arrow – this is the reason for the awe of the celestials (JR). A further cause for awe is the fact that this arrow wields the Śārṅga bow. 
[8]Vishnu, as Shiva’s arrow, pervaded the universe just as he had in his form as Trivikrama 
[9]The poet, through the use of multiple puns, likens the flames emitted by Shiva’s arrow to maidens frolicking with their lovers.
[10]The Prāṇāhuti ritual is performed by householders before a meal; it involves offering oblation to the fires that exist in the form of the five vital airs (‘prāṇarūpebhyo’gnibhya āhutiḥ | bhojanāt prāggṛhasthakartavye prāṇarūpāgnyuddeśyakāhutau, Vācaspatya). One sprinkles water around one’s plate while performing this ritual. In this verse, the fire of Shiva’s arrow is described as performing this ritual with the tears of Asura women. The Asura women are tearful because they are worried for the lives of their husbands. Alternatively, their tears may have resulted from the smoke emitted by the fiery arrow.
[11]One dances in joy (JR) 
[12]Actors disappear behind a screen at the close of a play (JR). 
[13]The flames, smoke, and sparks were masked by the similarly coloured gold ornaments, sapphires, and rubies respectively (JR). 
[14]The fire is fancied as laughing loudly in contempt at the foolish attempts of the Asuras to prevent its advance by employing gems and the like (JR). The bones are white and so is laughter; likewise, the crackling noise of bones is akin to the loud sound of laughter  
[15]Mankha describes the fire as hugging the Asuras in brotherly affection; a greater part of the verse employs puns to bring out the similarity between the fire and the Asuras, providing thereby a reason for the former’s brotherly affection towards the latter. One of the words for fire is ‘dhūmadhvaja’ (‘smoke-bannered’).
[16]Mankha compares the coils of smoke with the iron fetters released from the persons of captive celestial women due to the similarity in shape and colour as well as the common effect of bringing tears to the eyes of Asura damsels (JR); the Asura damsels, it is obvious, would be unhappy at the release of their enemy’s wives.
[17]Śūra (= sūra) = hero/sun; maṇḍalāgracchāyā = splendour (chāyā) of swords (maṇḍalāgra)/the preeminent (agra) splendour (chāyā) of the orb (maṇḍala) (JR). The poet employs pun to liken the circumstance of the Tripura’s annihilation with the setting of the sun.  
[18]Pramaya = death (JR). There is an apparent contradiction in describing the Danavas as accustomed to heat and cold but still burning with intense heat (‘pratāpa’) at the time of their death. JR explains ‘pratāpa’ as the (?febrile) heat that precedes death (‘etena pramayātpūrvaṃ pratāpavarṇanam’) and ‘news that causes fear among enemies’ (‘aribhayajananī vārtā’); the contextual significance of the latter explanation is unclear to me.  
[19]The heaps of ash with flames in between resembled the peaks of Mt. Kailasa interspersed with luminous herbs (JR).
[20]The three cities of the Asuras are compared to the three sacred Fires (Dakṣiṇāgni, Gārhapatya, Āhavanīya; Amarakoṣa, 2.7.849), the battlefield to the holy pedestal on which the Fires blaze, and Shiva to a hide-clad Yajamāna who, in the company of his wife Parvati, performs the Yajña of eliminating evil (JR)
[21]The sky with the scattered ashes of the Tripuras appeared like the chest of the dark-hued Vishnu adorned with a sacred thread; it is appropriate to compare the scattered ashes of the three Asura cities with a sacred thread because the latter also contains three cotton strands (‘saṃhatya tantutrayam ūrdhvaveṣṭnena rajjvākāraṃ kṛtvā tenopavītaṃ kuryāt’, Medhatithi on Manusmṛti, 2.44)  
[22]A servant (here, the arrow) often adopts his master’s (here, Shiva’s) behaviours (JR).
[23]A difficult-to-digest foodstuff often produces sour burps as an after-effect of digestion (JR). 
[24]The usage ‘Tribhuvanaguru’ (‘Master of the three worlds’) for Shiva is appropriate (JR) because a spiritual master scatters sacred rice grains to counter evil.
[25]One dances with abandon when drunk (JR). 
[26]‘Vījana’ is used here in the sense of ‘ullāsana’ (‘expansion’) (JR) 
[27]Brahma discarded the disguise of a charioteer (JR), Vishnu, of an arrow, Indra and other gods, of horses, and so on.
[28]According to the Purāṇas, Indra clipped the wings of mountains, some of which, afraid of being hit by his Vajra weapon, took shelter in the ocean (‘pakṣavantaḥ purā putra babhūvuḥ parvatottamāḥ | - - - śrutvā nāgānāṃ caritaṃ mahendraḥ pākaśāsanaḥ | ciccheda bhagavānpakṣān vajreṇaiṣāṃ samantataḥ || ahaṃ tu - - - | mārutena tadā vatsa prakṣipto’smi mahārṇave ||, Ramayana, 5.56.14-16)
[29]This verse employs some of the same puns as verse 21. There is an apparent contradiction (expressed through the interjection ‘ahaha’ – ‘How strange!’) in describing the setting of the sun as accompanied by the advent of a new light that brightened the directions and led to the blossoming of lotuses. The contradiction can be resolved by resorting to the alternative meanings of the punned words.
[30]The idea is that Lakshmi (Lady Fortune), who hitherto suffered in the company of the blazing Tripuras, was cooled by the celestial elephants with streams of ichor. The purport of the verse is that Lakshmi was relieved to meet the celestial elephants once again (JR); elephants are known to be the abodes of Lakshmi (‘śrīruvāca - - - - vasāmi nityaṃ - - - matte gaje, Mahābhārata, 13.11.16)
[31]The Bimba  (ivy gourd) plant is known for its red-coloured fruit with which Sanskrit poets often compare beautiful lips. 
[32]Attracted simultaneously to the Creator’s lotus abode and Ganesha’s ichor-streaked face, the bees couldn’t decide where to go. JR adds that these were no ordinary bees but those that frolicked amidst heavenly creepers. That even such experienced bees were overcome with indecision suggests that heaven enjoyed greater prosperity than ever.
[33]The beaming rays stand for arms; it is appropriate to welcome someone who has returned victorious with a hug (JR). 
[34]Note the poet’s clever use of the word ‘maṅkha’ (‘bard’) to suggest that the Lord immensely enjoyed this poetic eulogy – the Śrīkaṇṭhacaritam – that was composed by him.